BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-020-00676-7
RESEARCH PAPER
Ready or Not, AI Comes— An Interview Study of Organizational
AI Readiness Factors
Jan Jo¨hnk • Malte Weißert • Katrin Wyrtki
Received:13March2020/Accepted:20October2020/Publishedonline:22December2020
(cid:2)TheAuthor(s)2020
Abstract Artificial intelligence (AI) offers organizations correspondingindicatorsforAIreadinessassessments,and
much potential. Considering the manifold application discussesthegeneralimplicationsforAIadoption.Thisisa
areas, AI’s inherent complexity, and new organizational firststeptowardconceptualizingrelevantorganizationalAI
necessities, companies encounter pitfalls when adopting readiness factors and guiding purposeful decisions in the
AI. An informed decision regarding an organization’s entire AI adoption process for both research and practice.
readiness increases the probability of successful AI adop-
tionandisimportanttosuccessfullyleverageAI’sbusiness Keywords Artificial intelligence (cid:2) AI adoption (cid:2) AI
value.Thus,companiesneedtoassesswhethertheirassets, readiness(cid:2)Organizationalreadinessassessment(cid:2)Interview
capabilities, and commitment are ready for the individual study
AI adoption purpose. Research on AI readiness and AI
adoption is still in its infancy. Consequently, researchers
andpractitionerslackguidance onthe adoptionofAI.The 1 Introduction
paper presents five categories of AI readiness factors and
their illustrative actionable indicators. The AI readiness Artificial intelligence(AI) is ageneral-purpose technology
factors are deduced from an in-depth interview study with (GPT) with a unique learning capability that provides
25 AI experts and triangulated with both scientific and organizations with potentials for wide-ranging improve-
practitionerliterature.Thus,thepaperprovidesasoundset mentsaswellasentirelynewbusinessopportunities.Iansiti
of organizational AI readiness factors, derives and Lakhani 2020. Being a GPT, AI drives changes at the
task, process, and business model level in a plethora of
application areas and as such offers a competitive advan-
ElectronicSupplementaryMaterial Theonlineversionofthis tage to organizations (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2017).
article(https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-020-00676-7)containssup- Ample access to improved learning algorithms and avail-
plementarymaterial,whichisavailabletoauthorizedusers.
able AI use cases as well as corresponding solutions
facilitate AI adoption in organizations. In 2019, 80\% of
Acceptedaftertworevisionsbytheeditorsofthespecialissue
large organizations aimed to adopt or had adopted some
J.Jo¨hnk(&)(cid:2)K.Wyrtki form of AI (Gartner 2019; Ghosh et al. 2019). However,
ProjectGroupBusiness&InformationSystemsEngineeringof
most organizations use AI in single pilots, whereas only
theFraunhoferFIT,FIMResearchCenter,Wittelsbacherring10,
8\% of organizations have adopted AI in core practices
95444Bayreuth,Germany
e-mail:jan.joehnk@fit.fraunhofer.de (Fountaine et al. 2019). Due to AI’s nature as a GPT,
possible application scenarios are not always directly
K.Wyrtki
e-mail:katrin.wyrtki@fit.fraunhofer.de obviousand organizations must understand the technology
todecideontheintendedadoptionpurpose(Jovanovicand
M.Weißert
Rousseau 2005). Consequently, the adoption of AI poses
FIMResearchCenter,UniversityofBayreuth,Universita¨tsstraße
challenges on an organizational, technical, and individual
30,95447Bayreuth,Germany
e-mail:malteweissert@gmail.com level (Baier et al. 2019; Bughin et al. 2017). Thus,
1236 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
organizations must proactively cope with the challenges readinessandfosteringAIadoption(Alsheibanietal.2018;
caused by AI to mitigate risks and successfully adopt AI. Pumplun et al. 2019). Thus, we ask:
Research on AI adoption can draw on the two estab-
WhatfactorsconstituteorganizationalAIreadinessto
lished literature streams of innovation adoption and tech-
guide the AI adoption process?
nologyadoptionon the organizational level (e.g., Chwelos
etal.2001;DamanpourandSchneider2006;Hameedetal. Weconductanin-depthinterviewstudyandcollectdata
2012). Prior work on innovation adoption has focused on from25AIexpertstoconceptualizerelevantfactorsforan
the adoption process (Hameed et al. 2012), different organization’s AI readiness assessment (Schultze and
adoption factors (Frambach and Schillewaert 2002), or the Avital 2011). We use open and axial coding to deduce AI
application of adoption models to a specific innovation or readiness factors from the interview data (Corbin and
technology(OliveiraandMartins 2011).Yet, theliterature Strauss1990)andfurthertriangulateourconceptualization
emphasizes there is no unifying, one-size-fits-all theory of with readiness and adoption literature as well as insights
innovation adoption (Molla and Licker 2005). Further, from existing practitioner studies (Flick et al. 2004).
besides major general factors, innovation adoption ante- Drawing on our insights, we compile five categories –
cedents remain unspecific (Damanpour and Schneider strategic alignment, resources, knowledge, culture, and
2006). Organizational readiness for change theory postu- data – with 18 factors specifying distinct action fields of
lates that a higher level of organizational readiness organizational AI readiness. Further, we operationalize
increasesthesuccessofinnovationadoptionanddecreases thesefactorswith58illustrativeindicatorsandevaluateour
the risk of failure (Snyder-Halpern 2001; Weiner 2009). results via a card-sorting procedure in an AI-related
Mostly, readiness is conceptualized with psychological researchers’ focus group. Finally, we discuss the implica-
factors such as the commitment to change, as well as tions for the overarching adoption and readiness concepts
structural constituents as the capability to change and as well as for the literature on managing AI.
contextual factors (Lokuge et al. 2018; Weiner 2009) Insum,ourpaperisafirststeptowardcomprehensively
without consensus on related relevant factors (Nguyen conceptualizing and operationalizing organizational AI
et al. 2019). Consequently, readiness models require con- readiness. As such, we provide additional empirical
text-specific consideration and need to be tailored to the groundwork for theorizing on technology adoption and
related domain, i.e. a specific technology (Molla and readinessingeneral.Further,ourAIreadinessfactorsserve
Licker 2005). asthenecessaryfoundationfor purposefuldecisionsinthe
Considering AI’s technical characteristics and knowl- entireAIreadinessandadoptionprocess.Hence,weextend
edge barriers, AI adoption implies a high implementation the body of descriptive knowledge on AI readiness and
complexity (Gallivan 2001) which differentiates it from provideafirstbuildingblockforprescriptiveknowledgeto
otherdigitaltechnologiesthataretypicallyeasy-to-useand guide organizations toward successful AI adoption. Future
easy-to-deploy (Lokuge et al. 2018). Hence, AI adoption researchmaydrawontheseresultsinordertovalidateour
demandsathoroughunderstandingofrelevantAIreadiness illustrative indicators which assess AI readiness and pro-
factors, an operationalized readiness assessment, and a vide guidance on how to achieve a required AI readiness
tailored match between an organization’s current AI target level.
readiness and the aspired AI adoption purpose. Under-
standinghowtheconceptsofAIreadinessandAIadoption
relate to each other increases the probability of successful 2 Theoretical Background
AI adoption and is essential to leverage AI’s business
value. Although AI adoption draws on research on tech- This paper’s theoretical foundation is twofold: First, with
nology adoption, AI’s specifics require a dedicated inves- AI being a technological innovation, the literature on
tigation ofreadinessfactors. Existing investigations on the innovation adoption provides the scaffold of our research.
phenomenon shed light upon the influencing factors of AI Second, research on organizational readiness for change
adoption with the help of organizational frameworks like emphasizes readiness as a necessary precursor for organi-
TOE (technological, organizational, and environmental) zational change, such as AI adoption. In this section, we
(Alsheibani et al. 2018, 2019; Pumplun et al. 2019). embed our work on organizational AI readiness in the
However, it is unclear which factors are relevant for the conceptual frame of adoption and readiness literature.
organizational adoption challenges. We seek to conceptu-
alizeAIreadinessandimportantAIreadinessfactors.This 2.1 Innovation and Technology Adoption
is a prerequisite to enhancing prescriptive knowledge and
allowing action-oriented implications for building AI Various disciplines (e.g., sociology, psychology, and IS)
discuss innovation adoption on an individual and
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 7
organizational level (Gopalakrishnan and Damanpour 2.2 Organizational Readiness for Change
1997).Adoptionreferstothedecisiontouseaninnovation,
e.g., product, service, process, technology (Frambach and In line with adoption antecedents, research from different
Schillewaert 2002). To understand the necessities of disciplines(e.g.,management,health,andIS)discussesthe
organizational AI use, we focus on organizational tech- concept of organizational readiness for change (Weiner
nology adoption. Adoption decisions rest on the expecta- 2009).Inessence,readinessindicatesthestatenecessaryto
tion of improved organizational performance (Hameed engageinaspecificactivity,e.g.,theadoptionofaspecific
et al. 2012). Hence, the literature investigates the adoption innovation (Lokuge et al. 2018).
process (Damanpour and Schneider 2006; Rogers 2003), In IS, readiness has been discussed in several contexts,
factors that lead to the acquisition and continued use of e.g., the adoption of technologies (Abdinnour-Helm et al.
technology, and related effects on organizational perfor- 2003;Chwelosetal.2001;Lokugeetal.2018).Inaddition
mance (Hameed et al. 2012; Lokuge et al. 2018; Subra- to e-readiness, which gained popularity as the degree to
manian and Nilakanta 1996). which nations or organizations were prepared to benefit
The established innovation adoption process follows from e-innovations (Aboelmaged 2014; Molla and Licker
three stages: initiation, adoption decision, implementation 2005), the literature discusses digital readiness for the
(Rogers 2003). In the initiation stage, organizations rec- adoption of digital technologies (Lokuge et al. 2018;
ognize needs, become aware of innovation, form an atti- Nguyen et al. 2019). Nguyen et al (2019) define digital
tude toward it, and create a proposal for adoption readiness as ‘‘the degree to which an organization is ready
(Gopalakrishnan and Damanpour 1997). In the adoption to digitally transform the current organization’’. As AI
decision stage, organizations evaluate an innovation from classifies as digital technology (A˚gerfalk 2020), we apply
various perspectives to accept or reject the proposal. In digital readiness to understand the precursors of AI adop-
case of acceptance, the implementation stage covers the tion. IS literature describes various jumbled readiness
acquisition of the innovation, the performance of trials as factors influencing organizational readinessfor technology
well as continued use (Hameed et al. 2012). In case of adoption. For instance, financial and technological resour-
rejection, organizations may later choose to reinitiate and ces, management support, organizational culture, commit-
reassess the adoption process. ment, communication of goals, and partnership readiness
To investigate technology adoption factors on an orga- (Chwelos et al. 2001; Damanpour and Schneider 2006;
nizational level, research proposes adoption and imple- Iacovouetal.1995;Lokugeetal.2018;Robeyetal.2008).
mentation theories, e.g., diffusion of innovation theory Nguyen et al. (2019) systemize digital readiness
(DOI) (Rogers 2003), TOE framework (Tornatzky et al. according to the three overarching categories of organiza-
1990),technologyacceptance model(TAM)(Davis1985), tionalassets,capabilities,andcommitment.Bothassetsand
theory of reasoned action (TRA) (Fishbein and Ajzen capabilitiesarepartoforganizationalresources(Helfatand
1975), or theory of planned behavior (TPB) (Ajzen 1991). Peteraf 2003). Assets refer to tangible or intangible inputs
For extensive literature reviews see, e.g., Hameed et al. to production (Helfat and Peteraf 2003), whereas capabil-
(2012)orOliveiraandMartins(2011).Synthesizingextant ities include organizations’ measures to change assets
theories,fourmainadoptiondimensionsexist:Innovation’s (Nguyen et al. 2019). Commitment describes organiza-
characteristics (e.g., relative advantage, complexity, com- tions’ willingness and support for innovation initiatives
patibility, observability, and trialability), management’s (Molla and Licker 2005; Weiner 2009). Hence, building
commitment to innovation (e.g., CEO characteristics, digitalreadinessdoesnotdescribeaone-timetransitionbut
willingness to change, management support), organiza- focuses on the continuous development of factors in the
tionalcharacteristics(e.g.,scope,size,financialresources), three categories.
and environmental factors (e.g., competitors, suppliers, In the past, readiness models have been critiqued
customers) (Molla and Licker 2005; Sharma and Yetton regarding several issues. For one thing, readiness models
2003). However, adoption models must account for the require adaptations to account for organizations’ specific
specific technology in focus and its respective context context, such as industry or organizational particularities.
(MollaandLicker2005).Hence,theresearchmostlyeither For another thing, readiness models and their results often
investigates singular specific adoption factors, e.g., man- bear a bias due to companies’ self-assessment. Still,
agement support (Sharma and Yetton 2003), or provides a readiness is an important precursor of and organizational
compilation of factors based on the above-mentioned the- capability for successful technology adoption. Also, orga-
ories relatedtoa specific technology andcontext (Oliveira nizations face the risk of failure when not being ready for
and Martins 2011). adoption.Consequently,readinessmodelsareanimportant
tool to assess the organizational state of preparation to
1238 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
exploit the potential of an innovation (Molla and Licker organization by fostering their AI readiness first (Al-
2005). sheibani et al. 2019; Baier et al. 2019; Gallivan 2001).
Owing to its specifics and its challenges opposed to other
2.3 AI Specifics for Adoption and Readiness technologies,AIrequiresanexplicitdiscussion againstthe
backdropofresearchontechnologyadoptionandreadiness
AI comprises a set of underlying techniques to enable on the organizational level. However, the research on
agents to act intelligently (Russell et al. 2016). Hence, organizational AI adoption and AI readiness is still in its
organizations may use AI-based systems for various pur- infancy (Alsheibani et al. 2018; Pumplun et al. 2019) (see
poses such as autonomous vehicles, medical diagnoses, or also Table 2 in Appendix I, available online via http://
virtual assistants (Bughin et al. 2017). AI’s broad appli- springerlink.com).
cability both to address existing problems as well as to Alsheibani et al. (2018) describe AI readiness as ‘‘the
exploreentirelynewbusinessopportunitiesallowsAItobe preparedness of organizations to implement change
characterized as a GPT (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995; involving applications and technology related to AI’’.
Brynjolfssonetal.2017).Inspecific,AI’snatureasaGPT Particularly the AI readiness assessment before the adop-
impliesacompletelynewformofapproachingproblemsof tion decision enables organizations to proactively identify
various kinds and enables a significant impact on various potentialsgapsforsuccessfulAIadoption(Alshawi2007).
industries(Magistrettietal.2019).Consequently,AIopens Suchanassessmentprovidesdecision-relevantinformation
a wide-ranging array of different adoption purposes, i.e. and reduces uncertainty regarding the AI adoption deci-
organizations’ goals and objectives for AI adoption in sion. Further, the continuous assessment of AI readiness
specific application scenarios. Because of its widespread enables organizations to steer the development of their
potential, organizations have to understand AI as technol- assets, capabilities, and commitment (Molla et al. 2009).
ogy and derive the right level of ambition for possible Consequently, if an organization is capable of accurately
applications (Davenport 2018). measuring its AI readiness and drawing the right conclu-
Likewise, AI’s variety of adoption purposes requires sions before the adoption decision, it can reduce risk and
organizations to create the necessary conditions, and improve the adoption decision.
introduce managerial practices for successful AI adoption Alsheibanietal.(2018)investigateAIreadinessthrough
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2017; Hofmann et al. 2020). the lens of the TOE framework (Tornatzky et al. 1990).
Differingfromotherdigitaltechnologies,AIcanhardlybe Further, they presume that high AI readiness positively
characterized as easy-to-use or easy-to-deploy (Lokuge impacts AI adoption success (Alsheibani et al. 2018).
et al. 2018). Specifically, AI adoption comprises technical Pumplunetal.(2019)alsodrawontheTOEframeworkfor
(e.g., limited technology capabilities) and non-technical investigating AI readiness and extend it with AI-specific
(e.g., lack of leadership support) challenges that arise factors.However,tothebestofourknowledge,there isso
before and during implementation. Considering these far no structured conceptualization of readiness for tech-
complexitiesandneworganizationalnecessities,successful nology on the organizational perspective. Hence, organi-
AI adoption requires coordinated activities across the zations yet lack guidance on organizational factors, which
AI readiness AI adoption (Alsheibaniet al. 2018, 2019; Pumplunet al. 2019)
Adoption process
(e.g. Rogers 2003; Damanpourand Schneider 2006; Hameed et al. 2012)
Organizational
readiness Phase Initiation Adoption decision Implementation
assessment
•Identify organizational necessities Sub- Awareness Consideration Intention Evaluation Resource Acquisition Continued
and respective organizational phase allocation use
readiness factors
(cid:129)Prioritize and assess relevant Goal Identification of innovation and possible Decision to adopt / reject Organizational acceptance and use
readiness factors application scenarios the innovation of the innovation
(cid:129)Purposefully adapt and develop
organizational assets, capabilities,
and commitment
Organizational readiness
for change Innovation adoption
(e.g. Mollaand Licker 2005; Focus on the individual level: TAM, TRA, TPB
Weiner 2009) (e.g. Davis 1985; Fishbein and Ajzen1975; Ajzen1991)
Readiness in IS Focus on the organizational level: DOI, TOE
(e.g. Lokugeet al. 2018; (e.g. Rogers 2003; Tornatzkyet al. 1990)
Nguyen et al. 2019)
Fig.1 OurFocusonAIReadinessintheContextofAdoptionandReadinessLiterature
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 9
Interview experts
25
Focus: technological, organizational, environmental AI readiness factors Focus: organizational AI readiness factors
Indicator development
Factor identification, harmonization, and categorization
and validation
(cid:129) Goal: (cid:129) Goal: (cid:129) Goal: (cid:129) Goal:
Extract AI readiness factors Extract and harmonize Harmonize and group Develop indicators and
AI readiness factors AI readiness factors validate the results
(cid:129) Activities: (cid:129) Activities: (cid:129) Activities: (cid:129) Activities:
Open coding of 12 interviews, Open coding of 12 interviews, Axial coding with five joint Card-sorting with focus group,
weekly joint discussions weekly joint discussions coding workshops, weekly joint discussions
weekly joint discussions
(cid:129) Outcome: (cid:129) Outcome:
492 codes in 6 categories 895 codes in 39 categories (cid:129) Outcome: (cid:129) Outcome:
and 87 subcategories 1) 35 AI readiness factors in 18 AI readiness factors in
12 categories 5 categories and 58 indicators
2) 23 AI readiness factors in
8 categories
Triangulation with insights from AI-related literature and practitioner studies
Fig.2 OverviewofOurResearchApproach
are necessary to derive action-oriented implications for AI of AI readiness factors. We deduced AI readiness factors
readiness. fromboth theliterature andinterviewswith 25AIexperts.
Other insights suggest tackling common AI adoption Figure. 2 summarizes our research approach which we
barriers such as a lack of leadership support and a lack of elucidate in the following.
funding (Alsheibani et al. 2019). Yet, avoiding these
common pitfalls does not address the underlying infras- 3.1 Data Collection
tructural and cultural preconditions to AI readiness (Pum-
plun et al. 2019). Further, research remains vague as to We conducted an in-depth interview study to better
where organizations should address these AI-specific fac- understand the challenges and potentialsof AI adoptionas
torsintheadoptionprocessandwhatimplicationsarisefor well as relevant AI readiness factors in companies (Myers
the continued use. and Newman 2007). We used purposive sampling to
In sum, research so far provides fruitful theoretical identify 25 AI experts (E01–E25) from our professional
groundwork but cannot provide relevant organizational AI network that are considered as key informants regarding
readiness factors. Drawing on this previous work, we seek digital transformation and the adoption of emerging tech-
to provide a sound set of organizational AI readiness fac- nologies such as AI in their organizations (Bhattacherjee
tors and corresponding indicators for AI readiness assess- 2012) (Bhattacherjee 2012). Our participants contribute
ments. This will enable us to better understand AI’s perspectives from different organizational contexts (e.g.,
specifics and discuss the implications for the AI adoption AI adoption stage, AI users and providers, industry, and
process as well as the commonalities and distinct features company size; see Table 3 in Appendix II). This allowed
compared to the existing findings for other technologies. ustoholisticallyexploreAIreadinessfactorsandreflecton
Figure 1 summarizes our conceptual foundation and sem- their contingencies within the specific organizational con-
inal work. text. We stopped data collection after 25 interviews
becauseno significantnew topicswere broughtup and the
emerging factors were increasingly repetitive.
3 Method We structured the interviews into three parts: First, we
asked theparticipants fortheir understandingandprevious
We used a qualitative research approach to understand AI experiences with AI. This created a shared understanding
readiness factors (Bhattacherjee 2012). Thus, we account for the rest of the interview (Myers and Newman 2007).
for the complexity and novelty of the wide-spread AI Second, we asked for human-AI interaction characteristics
adoption in companies to derive a thorough understanding and their implications for companies. Third, we asked the
12310 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
interviewees for AI-related challenges and potentials, AI After identifying and consolidating the AI readiness
readinessfactors,andtheirorganizations’effortstowardAI factors, we developed preliminary illustrative indicators
adoption. We asked predominantly open-ended questions thatprovideastartingpointforfutureresearchtoassessAI
to account for our paper’s in-depth research approach and readiness (Burton-Jones and Grange 2013). We used
to generate rich data (Bhattacherjee 2012; Myers and feedbackfromafocusgrouptofurthertrimandrestructure
Newman 2007; Schultze and Avital 2011). We recorded, our results (see Appendix III for further details). Next, we
transcribed, and analyzed 1385 interview minutes with the presentourfinalcompilationof18AIreadinessfactorsand
experts’ consent. 58illustrativeindicators(seeTable 5inAppendix IVfora
complete list).
3.2 Data Analysis and Identification of AI Readiness
Factors
4 Organizational AI Readiness Factors
For data analysis, we used MAXQDA and started with
open coding of 12 interviews. One author assigned WestructuretheAIreadinessfactorsinfivecategoriesthat
descriptive codes to our interviewees’ statements to get an specify action fields and necessary conditions for suc-
understanding of the data’s breadth and depth (Saldan˜a cessfulAIadoption(seeTable 1).Thesecategoriesprovide
2013). This first coding round resulted in six broad cate- a specific organizational chassis for developing AI readi-
gories related to AI readiness and a total of 492 codes. ness (Pumplun et al. 2019). AI characteristics provide
Next,thesameauthorcontinuedwithasecondopencoding furtherreasoningforeachfactor’sorganizationalnecessity.
round for theremaining twelve interviews. Inweeklyjoint
sessions, all authors discussed insights and emerging links 4.1 Strategic Alignment
to align the further coding with the theoretical considera-
tions. After consolidating the coding set, we derived 895 AI-business potentials describe an organization’s fit and
codes in 39 categories and 87 subcategories. compatibility toward AI innovations (Shahrasbi and Pare´
In the third coding round, we used axial coding to 2014). Specifically, AI readiness requires awareness of
specify properties and dimensions of the existing cate- appropriate use cases for either solving an organizational
goriesandsubcategories(CorbinandStrauss1990).During problem or addressing new opportunities (Hofmann et al.
axial coding, we discussed intermediate results within the 2020; Pumplun et al. 2019).Additionally,companies must
research team in five coding workshops to immerse our- examineAI-basedsystemsfortheirrelativeadvantageover
selves in the field and gain new insights from the coded othersolutions(Pumplunetal.2019).OwingtoAI’sbroad
data (Saldan˜a 2013). Each workshop was face-to-face and applicability along value chains, organizations need to
lasted about 60 min. In these workshops, we reviewed execute novel approaches for use case discovery that
existing codes, discussed ambiguities, and reclassified or emphasize the opportunity perspective to explore pur-
renamed factors to enhance clarity and meaning. Thus, we poseful AI-business potentials (Hofmann et al. 2020).
systematically developed AI readiness factors following
‘‘Inprofessionallife,Iwouldsaythatthereisactually
the established TOE framework and excluded categories,
noareainthevaluechaininwhichAIcannotbeused
subcategories, and codes with no immediate link to AI
to fundamentally change something. […]. Just think
readiness. This resulted in 35 AI readiness factors in 12
of[…]yourbusinesscases.Wherearethingsthatare
categories. In line with our research question, we subse-
not good so far, or are too expensive, or rather need
quentlynarrowedthefocusonorganizationalfactorsinthe
optimization under economic aspects?’’ (E10)
TOE framework. Thereby, we carved out factors at the
locus of companies’ managerial actions regarding organi- Customer AI readiness describes the knowledge and
zational assets, capabilities, and commitment toward AI. acceptance of customers toward using AI-integrated
We either transformed technological and environmental offerings (Pumplun et al. 2019). Owing to AI’s inherent
factorsto depict the organizational measures and reactions complexity, AI-based systems often lack transparency,
tosuchfactorsordroppedtechnologicalandenvironmental whichhinderscustomerstoacceptthoseofferings.Further,
factorswithnoorganizationalrepresentation.Thisresulted customers who lack knowledge and acceptance build
in 23 organizational AI readiness factors in 8 categories. expectations toward AI that cannot be met, leading to
During the entire data analysis, we continuously reflected frustration when using AI-integrated offerings (Brill et al.
onthedataandouremergingunderstandingwithmemoing 2019). Consequently, organizations need to prepare cus-
(Saldan˜a 2013). Further, we used AI-related literature and tomers by forming adequate expectations, because cus-
practitioner studies to triangulate our conceptualization of tomers build acceptance through perceived usefulness
AI readiness factors (Flick et al. 2004). (Davis 1985).
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 11
Table1 OrganizationalAIReadinessFactors
Factor AIcharacteristics Organizationalnecessity
Strategic AI-business AIfunctionsarehighlyversatileandbroadlyapplicable AI-businesspotentialsensurethatAIadoptionis
alignment potentials beneficialandsuitablefortheorganization
CustomerAI AIuserequiresanunderstandingofthecomplexityand CustomerAIreadinessenablesinternalorexternal
readiness lackoftransparencyoflearningalgorithms customerstoappropriatelyuseAI-integrated
offerings
Top AI’sinherentcomplexityposeschangenotonlywithinbut TopmanagementsupportsignalsAI’sstrategic
management acrossorganizationallevelswhichrequirestop relevancetotheorganizationandfostersAI
support managementcommitment initiatives
AI-processfit AI-basedsystemsaremorepreciseifprocessesare AI-processfitthroughstandardization,
structuredandprovidestandardizeddatainput reengineering,andimplementationofnewprocesses
facilitatesAIadoption
Data-driven AI-basedsystemsarefundamentallydata-drivenand Data-drivendecision-makingfostersAIadoption
decision- requireopennesstoincorporatesuchinsights becausebothutilizedataandstatisticalmethodsto
making gaininsights
Resources Financial AI-basedsystemsrequirehighinvestmentstotailorassets StrategicallocationofthefinancialbudgetforAI
budget andcapabilitiestotheuniquecontextanddata adoptionsupportstheovercomingofinitial
obstaclesanduncertainty
Personnel AIadoptionrequiresabroaderspectrumofdifferentroles AIspecialistsandbusinessanalystswithAIknow-
andknow-howforcorebusinessuse howfacilitateAIadoption
IT DeployingAIposeshighworkloadsanddatastorage ITinfrastructureenablesAI-relatedactivitiesandAI
infrastructure requirements integration
Knowledge AIawareness AI’sunderlyingconcepts,e.g.,machinelearningorthe AIawarenessensuresthatemployeeshaveadequate
autonomyofdata-baseddecisionsupport,arehardto understandingandexpectationstowardAI
grasp.
Upskilling AI-basedsystemsincorebusinessrequireeveryemployee Upskillingenablesemployeestolearnanddevelop
tohaveabasicunderstandingofAI AIorAI-relatedskills
AIethics AI-basedsystemsareatriskforbiasedlearningand AIethicscomprisemeasurestopreventbias,safety
unethicaloutcomes violations,ordiscriminationinAIoutcomes
Culture Innovativeness Employees’fearofAI-inducedjoblossthreatens Innovativenessincreasesemployees’willingnessto
proactiveinnovativeness changethestatusquothroughtheapplicationofAI
Collaborative AIdeploymentreliesonintegratingdifferentperspectives, Collaborativeworkenablesemployeestoworkin
work i.e.domain,data,andIT teamsandcombinedifferentskills
Change Employees’lackofunderstandingandfearofAIthreaten Changemanagementhelpsemployeestounderstand
management theacceptanceofAI-basedsystems andcopewithAI-inducedorganizationalchange
Data Data AI-basedsystemslearnthroughdifferentdatatypesand DataavailabilitywithintheorganizationfuelsAI
availability largedataamounts solutions
Dataquality AI-basedsystemsachievebetterresultsthehigherthe DataqualityensuresaccurateAIoutcomes
qualityofthedatatheylearnwith
Data AIpersonnelrequireaccesstorelevantdatasourcesfor DataaccessibilityfacilitatesAIexpertstoeasily
accessibility deployment prototypeanddevelopAIsolutions
Dataflow InitialandcontinuoustrainingofAI-basedsystems Dataflowbetweenitssourceanditsuseensures
requiressmoothandautomateddataflow highdataaccessibilitytoAIexperts
‘‘That is why it ultimately means that the end-user for bottom-up initiatives. Considering the wide range of
must be prepared, i.e. ideally be taken along, must organizational necessitiesassociated with AI adoption, top
have a clear expectation or vision of what the (AI) management support is crucial for successful AI adoption.
system will be able to do in the first minimal viable Experts stressed an organization can only commit to AI
productvariant.[…].Let’sputitthisway:themoreit adoption, once the top management provides an organiza-
can do and the better it can do what is promised, the tion-wide signal. Strong top management support indica-
higher the acceptance.’’ (E08) torsareintegratingAIadoptionintostrategy(Bughinetal.
2017) and fostering AI knowledge and AI awareness
Top management support describes the willingness to
(Baslom and Tong 2019).
commence AI initiatives top-down and to signal support
12312 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
‘‘The use of AI can only work if it [AI adoption] is ConcerningAIpersonnel,intervieweeshaveparticularly
drivenfromaboveand[must]thereforestartwiththe identified business analysts and AI specialists as relevant
board members.’’ (E10) human resources. Business analysts have an abstract
understanding of AI capabilities (Bawack et al. 2019) as
AI-process fit describes the necessary linkage between
well as domain know-how. Therefore, they can facilitate
an organization’s AI strategy and its processes to increase
use case discovery and act as translators between business
AI readiness. Changes accompanying AI adoption always
functionsandAIspecialists(Fountaineetal.2019).Inturn,
affect an organization’s processes. In this respect, AI-pro-
AI specialists have dedicated AI-related skills (e.g., data
cess fit reflects an organization’s compatibility regarding
scientists)andcandevelopAIsolutionsbasedonself-build
AI and is facilitated by a mature process landscape, i.e.
and pre-built models (Catalyst Fund 2020).
standardizedandstructuredprocesses(Watsonetal.2019).
‘‘So, having people in the organization that are
‘‘Next,ofcourse,areprocesses.IfIdon’thaveproper
interpreters of the technology, that understand what
processes […] and if my process allows many indi-
the business needs [are] and can translate that into
vidual steps, where a person decides, ’go left, go
technology needs, and vice versa, […] that whole
right…?’ So, if a certain degree of standardization is
cycle […] has to be created.’’ (E03)
missing,thenitisalsoaverystronghurdle[forAI].’’
(E24) The IT infrastructure must be modular to facilitate the
integrationofnewAIapplicationsandhaveahighcapacity
Data-drivendecision-making(DDDM)isthepracticeof
for AI-related data-intensive training and testing proce-
using insights based on data analytics to make decisions
dures (Catalyst Fund 2020; Groopman 2018). Thus, orga-
(CatalystFund2020;ProvostandFawcett2013)insteadof
nizations focus on developing three underlying IT
relyingon‘‘gutfeelingorbusinessinstinct’’(Jarrahi2018).
infrastructure capabilities for AI: data storage capabilities
DDDM not only leads to performance improvements in
to generate and store large amounts of data; networking
organizations but also increases AI readiness as it repre-
capabilities to access, process, and transport data quickly;
sents the preliminary practice for AI-driven decision
and scalable computing power capabilities to handle AI
making(Colson2019;IansitiandLakhani2020;Microsoft
workloads (Groopman 2018; Intel 2018).
2020). Thus, organizations should foster DDDM as an
organizationalpracticeandprepareemployeesforaculture ‘‘Communicationtechnologyhascomefarenoughto
where AI provides complementaryinsightsto support firm transport even large amounts of data quickly and we
decisions (Jarrahi 2018). also have hardware that can hold and process this
data. […] And these are the drivers that make it
‘‘I coach board members who want to turn their
technically possible for us to go beyond what was
division or […] their company into a data-driven
[previously] possible.’’ (E15)
company. And for me, data-driven means above all
[…]creating valuewith data.And, ofcourse, AI isa
4.3 Knowledge
form of value creation.’’ (E10)
Employees need AI awareness, i.e. an abstract under-
4.2 Resources
standing of cognitive AI functions like perceiving, pre-
dicting, or generating (Hofmann et al. 2020). This allows
Financial budget refers to the financial resources that
employees to see AI as a versatile tool and its application
organizations allocate toward AI adoption (Pumplun et al.
potential intheir specificcontext orindustry. Forinstance,
2019). Since the AI application lifecycle comprises tai-
employees recognize the importance of high-quality input
loring AI systemstowardanorganization’s uniquecontext
as a prerequisite for high-quality AI outcome (Agrawal
and data, adopting AI is time and cost-intensive (Hummer
et al. 2018). As a consequence of building AI awareness,
etal.2019).Besides,AIadoptionrequiresorganizationsto
employees gain adequate expectations toward AI.
invest in building know-how and overcome initial uncer-
tainty about AI capabilities and their value (Alsheibani ‘‘It [creating awareness] simply has to be a continu-
et al. 2019). ousprocessofchange,becauseideallythisawareness
isthenknownthroughoutthecompany.Peopleknow
‘‘Because it’s just so often that I can’t say ‘Hey,
what you can do with it, what you can’t do. And AI
we’re going tostartwith thetopicofAI andmakeX
should then essentially be a tool […] to create a
millionbudgetavailableandplayaroundabitandsee
solution.’’ (E09)
what comes out of it’, that’s just not how it works.’’
(E09)
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 13
Upskilling develops interdisciplinary skillsets that are communicate and work together in cross-functional teams
necessaryfor thesuccessfulimplementationofAI projects (Davenport 2018; Fountaine et al. 2019). In the context of
(Davenport 2018). This comprises equipping employees AI, collaborative work is crucial to overcome siloed work
with AI-related know-how such as statistics, data man- and to identify new use cases that are beneficial to the
agement, data analytics, or data engineering on the one organization (Fountaine et al. 2019). Thus, organizations
hand, but also with domain know-how on the other hand should promote different forms of collaboration so that
(Pumplun et al. 2019). Owing to a shortage of skilled AI employeeswithdifferentskillscancomplementeachother.
specialists in the labor market, it becomes obligatory for
‘‘On the one hand, I’m driving the technology for-
organizations to invest in upskilling employees ‘ capabili-
ward,asIT.[…].Ontheotherhand,Inaturallyneed
ties (Davenport 2018; Kruse et al. 2019).
the business departments, i.e. the users of this tech-
‘‘From the company’s point of view, it will be nec- nology.’’ (E12)
essary to make upfront investments and train people,
Changemanagementhelpsemployeestounderstandand
train employees, and further qualify them.’’ (E23)
cope with AI-induced organizational change (Pumplun
AIethicsincludesnovelmethodstopreventunethicalAI etal.2019).Particularly,change managementisimportant
outcomeswhich can bearesultofbiased learningorinput to reduce misconceptions regarding AI in terms of fear of
data. In case of not being ethically ready, organizations possiblejobloss(Fountaineetal.2019).Thisisespecially
might blindly rely on biased AI outcomes and be held important considering that AI-based systems do not nec-
liable for discrimination even if unintentional (Agrawal essarilyreplacejobprofilesasawhole,butrathertakeover
et al. 2018; Dattner et al. 2019). For instance, gender bias repetitive tasks or individual process steps (Brynjolfsson
in data sets for AI hiring tools can result in biased candi- and McAfee 2017). Like customers, employees must be
date selection (Tambe et al. 2018). To increase AI readi- made aware of AI benefits through change management to
ness, organizations need to establish new measures and increase acceptance.
protocols to prevent discrimination and therefore mitigate
‘‘The challenge then often lies in the dialogue with
risks for liability (Agrawal et al. 2018; Groopman 2018).
theemployees.Takingthembythehandandreacting
‘‘You have to be aware […] that the data also con- to their individual situation. […] This is a change
tainsakindofprejudiceorbias.[…].Andifyoujust management task that requires sensitivity.’’ (E24)
stubbornly apply algorithms to any amount of data,
then[…]decisionswillbemadebuttheymaynotbe 4.5 Data
entirely correct.’’ (E15)
Data availability comprises the relevant amount and types
4.4 Culture of data which are both necessary for AI models to be
trainedandtogenerateaccuratepredictions(Agrawaletal.
Innovativeness is based on the amount and pace of adapt- 2018; Kruse et al. 2019). Regarding data type, interview
ability that organizational members possess (Kruse et al. experts point out that different data types influence AI
2019). Innovative behavior with a general-purpose tech- readiness. Structured data, for instance, which is stored in
nologysuch asAI requiresemployeestoinitiate change at two-dimensionalrelationaltables(Linetal.2018),iseasier
a rapid pace and in many areas so that organizations can to utilize for standardized AI applications. On the other
realize AIs’ full potential. As such, innovative behavior hand,unstructureddata,suchasaudio,video,orimagefiles
includes experimentation, risk-taking, and diverse prob- (Groopman 2018), is utilized in more advanced AI appli-
lem-solving skills (Microsoft 2020; Yuan and Woodman cations like object recognition.
2010). Since large organizations tend to rely too much on
‘‘First of all, many people always underestimate the
the status quo (Pumplun et al. 2019), innovative behavior
amount of learning data required.’’ (E12)
should be particularly encouraged.
Data quality specifies different quality dimensions that
‘‘There are simply more innovative employees who
verify its suitability for use by data consumers. Improving
are more open-minded [and] find it easier to try out
on these quality dimensions increases AI readiness as AI-
somethingnew.[…].Whosimplyplayfullyfaceitfor
models need to be trained with high-quality data to gen-
oncewithoutreservations.Earlyadopters[…],ifyou
erate good results (Davenport 2018; Pumplun et al. 2019).
like.’’ (E12)
AI-relevant data quality dimensions include, for instance,
Collaborative work describes the degree to which completeness and correctness (Sidi et al. 2012). Since
domainexperts,AIspecialists,andITdepartmentsactively organizations often face data quality issues with historical
12314 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
data, they need to improve on universal capabilities like value from the wide range of AI’s potential application
data preparation, data processing, and data quality assur- scenarios. Thus, AI adoption can have different facets
ance to increase data readiness (Groopman 2018; Iansiti depending on the distinct adoption purpose. The AI adop-
and Lakhani 2020; Kruse et al. 2019). tion purpose can span from single use-cases to self-con-
tained AI-driven business models. Hence, organizations
‘‘Even if I have built the biggest or the best machine
must understand AI’s potentials as of where and how AI
learning model, if bad data comes in, the result will
can add value.
be bad too. […] ‘Shit in, shit out’ is the basic prin-
ciple behind it.’’ (E08) ‘‘ThereareorganizationslikeAppleandAmazonthat
are deeply involved with AI, its creation and uti-
Data accessibility includes quick and easy access to
lization in a very complex way and getting very
data. It is facilitated by access management which grants
significant results from it. So if organizations under-
personnel authorized access to various data sources
stood it better and had more resources to explore it
throughout the organization (Catalyst Fund 2020). Conse-
they would be capable of generating some fairly
quently, AI specialists are enabled to prototype and
significant returns from the investment into AI but
develop AI models with appropriate data (Intel 2018).
most organizations don’t really know what’s its use,
Furthermore, organizations might simplify data accessi-
howtogetstarted,whattoexpectfromusecasesetc.
bilitythroughdatacentralizationmeasures(e.g.,establisha
So, it’s still very much an exploratory process for
data lake or a data warehouse) rather than keeping data in
many companies.’’ (E03)
distributed data silos (Iansiti and Lakhani 2020; Pumplun
et al. 2019). This requires organizations to clearly define their AI
adoption purpose. Subsequently, a holistic AI readiness
‘‘Thereispreparedness[…]inthesenseoftheyhave
assessment building on our AI readiness factors may help
to have ready access to data. That data has to be
organizations to evaluate their status quo and derive cor-
manageableandmanipulatablebytheseAIsystems.’’
responding action fields. However, besides the specific AI
(E03)
adoption purpose that may require a different set of pri-
GooddataflowenablesAIspecialiststomovedatafrom oritiesregardingthefactors,AIreadinessisalsocontingent
its source to its use. An automated and smooth data flow on the organizational context (e.g., industry, customers,
facilitates the implementation and maintenance of AI- products).
basedsystemsastheycontinuouslyprocessdataevenafter
‘‘It would be good if you had something like a
the initial training. Indicators for good data flow include
guideline, a checklist, or something where you can
defined extract-transform-load processes, established data
determine(a)what degree ofmaturitythecompanies
pipelines, as well as continuous and automated data
have today to be AI-ready and (b) what potential is
streams, among other (Catalyst Fund 2020; Groopman
therespecificallyincompaniesfortheuseofAI.And
2018).
I think that, from my experience, this is completely
‘‘So, on the development side, I am responsible for dependent on the industry, target customer, product,
data pipeline, […] providing the right data, in the or whatever.’’ (E19)
right format, in the right population, in the right
Drawing on the 58 self-developed illustrative indicators
quality to our machine learning engineers.’’ (E13)
for the AI readiness factors (see Table 5 in Appendix IV),
companies may assess their organizational AI readiness
4.6 Emerging Insights Beyond the AI Readiness
resulting in an overview of their readiness level per factor
Factors
(seeFig. 4foranexemplaryvisualizationinAppendix V).
While such an assessment bears some potential pitfalls, it
The AI readiness categories and factors describe the
also facilitatescompanies toderive actionable measuresto
organizational chassis for developing AI readiness.
improve their current AI readiness level to the desired
Besides, our explorative interviews provide insights that
target level. This may lead to iterative cycles of
help to understand the hurdles for successful AI adoption.
(re)defining the AI adoption purpose, assessing and
Consequently, our findings are a necessary precursor to
developing AI readiness, and AI adoption.
indicate how organizations can explore AI’s potentials.
However, owing to AI’s characteristics as GPT, AI adop- ‘‘If I don’t have anything to do with AI in my core
tion differentiates from previously discussed technology business yet, what do I have to do? First, I must find
adoption. Organizations define and pursue individual AI small use cases where I can demonstrate the advan-
adoption purposes that describe how they seek to accrue tagesofthetechnology.ThenImustthinkabouthow
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 15
I can make this visible in the organization. Then I we summarize the theoretical contributions and practical
must think about how I can build up the competen- implicationsof ourwork aswell as ourpaper’s limitations
cies. Then I must think about how I can spread this and promising future research avenues.
throughouttheorganizationsothatitultimatelyleads
to a continuous change process. These are relatively 5.1 Conceptualizing Organizational AI Readiness
easythingstowritedownonpaper,butinreallife,it for Successful AI Adoption
looks a bit different.’’ (E09)
Our interviews emphasize that successful AI adoption
Building on prototypes, experiments, and preceding
requires both understanding and managing AI readiness.
projectsasstepsofAIadoption,companiesmaythenpush
Further, drawing on the literature on organizational readi-
their AI adoption purpose to shift over time. For example,
nessforchangeandtechnologyadoption,wearguethatAI
they may opt to start with internal applications before
readiness is a valuable concept to account for the tech-
involving the customer interface. Again, this emphasizes
nology and context specifics of readiness (Lokuge et al.
AI’sspecificsasaGPTthatoffersvariousopportunitiesbut
2018). We build on the TOE framework, an established
also necessitates an individual understanding of each
construct of organizational adoption literature, to concep-
application scenario.
tualizeAIreadinessfromanorganizationalperspective.AI
‘‘There is my directive that we […] learn how to use poseschallengesandopportunitiesthatdifferentiateitfrom
AI. Not at the interface of customers and intermedi- other technologies (see Sect. 2.3 for further details). This
aries but in internal processes. I would not like to emphasizes the need for a specific AI readiness consider-
have our learning curve at the expense of our cus- ation against the backdrop of existing literature on readi-
tomers or intermediaries if the AI is not yet working nessandtechnologyadoption.Weaimtopresentaholistic
well.’’ (E12) conceptualization of AI readiness allowing researchers to
understandwhatourresultsbuildonandtoextendexisting
Thus, over time, AI readiness is a recurring issue that
knowledge. Considering AI’s nature as a GPT, we posit
must follow the specific AI adoption purpose at hand and
two important perspectives on the AI readiness factors.
consider previous experiences and improvements to the
First, ourresults yield new AI-specific readinessfactors
organizational AI readiness level. Therefore, our intervie-
that emerge from AI’s distinct features. This includes, for
weesdescribeAIreadinessandAIadoptionasintertwined
instance,factorsofthecategorydatawhichistheessential
concepts that mutually demand and foster each other. In
inputofAImodels,orfactorssuchasAIethicsthatemerge
that, AI readiness fosters successful AI adoption (or suc-
from potentially biased AI outcomes (Tambe et al. 2018).
cessful AI adoption necessitates AI readiness) and suc-
Second, our interviews corroborate readiness factors that
cessful AI adoption fosters AI readiness for future
are comparable to adopting any other technology and are
application scenarios (or AI readiness necessitates suc-
also relevant for AI adoption. For instance, our results
cessful AI adoption in smaller experiences to make AI’s
confirm the relevance of the well-known adoption factors
potential comprehensible).
top management support (Sharma and Yetton 2003) and
‘‘I think people have to experience some kind of collaboration (Dewi and Ahamat 2018) for AI adoption.
epiphany […]. And I believe that these aha experi- However,although suchfactorsmay bealmostuniversally
ences […] is what ultimately makes it so that the valid, AI requires taking a context-specific perspective on
acceptance then increases. That means also, in the the AI readiness factors. Hence, dependent on the specific
whole chicken-and-egg principle, is what I develop context of AI adoption, companies must rearrange their
actually what is accepted?’’ (E07) organizational chassis and derive appropriate measures to
foster the necessary AI readiness factors. Additionally, we
argue that AI implies a purpose-specific consideration
5 Discussion owingtoAI’snatureasaGPTthatoffersabroadvarietyof
application scenarios. Hence, organizations’ adoption pur-
In the following, we will position the results of our posesmayvaryovertime.Likewise,AIadoptionrequiresa
exploratory interview study within the existing adoption continuousassessmentoftheAIreadinessfactorsbasedon
and readiness literature. Thereby, we conceptualize AI the intended adoption purpose. Therefore, AI as a GPT
readinessasavaluableadditiontothescholarlyknowledge demands a new understanding of the readiness and adop-
base and a necessary foundation for successful AI adop- tion concept that is both context- and purpose-specific.
tion.Further,wediscusstheinterdependenciesbetweenAI Given our results, we conceptualize AI readiness being
readinessandAIadoptionasintertwinedconcepts.Finally, twofold. First,AI readiness comprises 18 readinessfactors
alongfivecategoriesthatprovidetheorganizationalchassis
12316 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
for developing AI readiness. Second, beyond the specific well as the literature on managing AI in organizations is
factors, AI readiness entails the understanding of pur- threefold.
poseful AI adoption. Thus, conceptualizing AI readiness First, our paper provides additional empirical ground-
doesnotonlycompriseitsconstitutingfactorsbutalsotheir work for theorizing on readiness and adoption. We inte-
implications for a purposeful assessment, deriving action grate AI readiness into the process of AI adoption and the
fields and suitable measures, and continuous consideration underlying innovation and technology adoption concepts.
during advancing AI adoption. We show that readiness is an integral element throughout
However, literature commonly describes adoption and theentireadoptionprocessinsteadofaprecursorcondition
readinessonlyastwovaguelyrelatedconcepts.Integrative (Lippert and Davis 2006). Thus, we conclude that it is not
work to unveil their interdependencies is rare (Molla and sufficient to establish readiness once before technology
Licker 2005). Thus, the readiness concept is often limited adoption because both concepts are highly interdependent
to being a sequential precursor to the broader adoption and mutually reinforcing. In contrast, the concepts of
concept(LippertandDavis2006).Similarly,theemerging readinessandadoptionneedtobediscussedinconjunction
literature on AI adoption and readiness lacks a thorough but as distinct concepts that each offers a valuable lens on
discussion of how the two concepts go hand in hand when (intended) technology use in organizations. So far, litera-
companiesseektobenefitfromAI’spotentials(Alsheibani ture has failed to take such an integrative stance. We
etal.2018;Pumplunetal.2019).Fromourinterviews,we understand our work as a step in this direction to better
emphasizetheneedtoestablishthenecessaryprerequisites guide managerial actions for organizational readiness that
for AI use in companies. Further, we put forward two unfold their full potential for successful technology
important considerations to integrate adoption and readi- adoption.
ness literature in the context of AI. First, AI adoption and Second, we contribute to the emerging literature on AI
readinessaredistinctyethighlyinterdependent.GivenAI’s readiness and AI adoption (Alsheibani et al. 2018; Pum-
inherent complexity and the arising new organizational plun et al. 2019). Based on AI’s underlying technological
necessities, AI readiness must be an integral part of com- characteristicsandthearisingorganizationalnecessitiesfor
panies’ decisions across the entire adoption process to successfulAIadoption,wederived18AIreadinessfactors
guide investments, prioritization, and resource allocation in five categories that conceptualize AI readiness. With
(Baier et al. 2019). Consequently, understanding and illustrative indicators, we provide a starting point for dis-
assessing AI readiness is an important means to purpose- tinctactionfieldsfordevelopingAIreadiness.Indoingso,
fully adapt the organizational chassis for successful AI we corroborate existing factors but also provide additional
adoption (Pumplun et al. 2019). Second, AI adoption and factors accounting for AI’s specifics. We posit that AI
readiness mutually reinforce (or restrict) one another. AI poses different opportunities and challenges compared to
adoption often follows cycles of exploring and piloting other technologies owing to its nature as GPT. Thus, AI
individual use cases, gradually expanding across compa- requires a more thorough and integrated understanding of
nies’ processes and departments (Hofmann et al. 2020). readiness and adoption because it offers a broad variety of
Thus,AIreadinessbecomesapermanentyetfluidissuefor application scenarios. Thus, we argue that while we draw
companies instead of a one-time consideration because AI on our existing understanding of the two concepts, AI
readiness requirements may vary with the intended use of readiness requires both context- and purpose-specific con-
AI’s potentials and experience from prior cycles. sideration. The holistic nature of our categories, factors,
In sum, we conceptualize AI readiness with its 18 fac- andillustrativeindicatorsmayalsoserveasablueprintfor
tors not as a mere precursor condition but as a foundation deriving relevant organizational readiness factors for other
and integral element throughout the entire AI adoption (digital) technologies and elaborating on the interdepen-
process (see Fig. 3). Both concepts foster and necessitate dencies between their respective adoption purpose and
eachotherwhichleadstoamutuallyreinforcingandhighly success (Lokuge et al. 2018).
intertwined nature. Hence, with changing context and Third,wecontributetotheliteratureonmanagingAIin
adoption purposes, AI readiness requires perpetual organizations (Brynjolfsson and Mitchell 2017). Compa-
consideration. nies face several difficulties during AI adoption, for
instance, the identification of suitable use cases to utilize
5.2 TheoreticalContributionandPracticalImplications AI’s potentials (Hofmann et al. 2020). By conceptualizing
organizational AI readiness, we provide relevant factors
Summarizing the results and discussion above, our work and indicators to better understand and assess what mea-
empirically conceptualizes AI readiness and its roles for sures organizations require for successful AI adoption.
successful AI adoption. The contribution to both the Further, we argue that assessing AI readiness exposes
broader literature on technology adoption and readiness as action fields for AI adoption stemming from both AI’s
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 17
AI adoption
Initiation Adoption decision Implementation
fosters/ fosters/
AI adoption purpose
necessitates necessitates
Organizational AI readiness
Strategic alignment Resources Knowledge Culture Data
(cid:129) AI-business potentials (cid:129) Financial budget (cid:129) AI awareness (cid:129) Innovativeness (cid:129) Data availability
(cid:129) Customer AI readiness (cid:129) Personnel (cid:129) Upskilling (cid:129) Collaborative work (cid:129) Data quality
(cid:129) Top management support (cid:129) IT infrastructure (cid:129) AI ethics (cid:129) Change management (cid:129) Data accessibility
(cid:129) AI-process fit (cid:129) Data flow
(cid:129) Data-driven decision-making
Fig.3 IntegratingAIReadinessintheAIAdoptionProcess
context and purpose specifics. Thus, research into AI could also help to differentiate AI readiness factors
readiness can help to alleviate the difficulties with AI depending on the organizational context and specific AI
adoption and propose suitable adaptations to the organi- adoption purpose (Bughin et al. 2017; Pumplun et al.
zational chassis as prescriptive guidance. Thus, our results 2019).
serveasthedescriptivegroundworkforfurtherresearchon Further, we provided insights into the complex interre-
AI management inorganizations, organizational readiness, lations of AI readiness based on our comprehensive
and technology adoption. understanding and discussion of AI readiness factors.
Regarding practical implications, our paper grants However, we do not elucidate the factors’ and indicators’
insights into opportunities and challenges for AI adoption. prioritizationandweightingconcerningtheoverarchingAI
The AI readiness factors provide comprehensive guidance adoption purpose and specific organizational contingen-
to decision-makers on relevant managerial action fields. cies.Thus,futureworkmaycontinuetovalidatethefactors
BasedonanAIreadinessassessment,decision-makersmay and our self-developed illustrative indicators in a first step
reflect and adapt the factors to specific organizational to explore how individual factors and their combinations
needs.SettinganddevelopingadequateAIreadinesstarget influence AI adoption success in the subsequent step. A
levelsiscompulsoryinordertoderiveactionablemeasures quantitativeresearchapproachsimilartoourexemplaryAI
for successful AI adoption. Thus, our results assist orga- readiness assessment seems promising to further validate
nizations in managing the AI adoption process and guide our results (see similar work from other domains, e.g.,
AI investments, resource allocation, and prioritization. Lokuge et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2015).
Finally, our findings explicate the need for context-
5.3 Limitations and Future Research specific considerations for organizational readiness by
referring to AI’s characteristics. While we propose AI
Our results are subject to limitations that stimulate further readiness factors, we also acknowledge that synergies
research. According to our purposive cross-industry inter- concerning the readiness for other (digital) technologies
view sample, our results primarily reflect the perspectives may exist. A comparison of organizational readiness fac-
of experts in management positions. Further research may tors for several technologies based on their underlying
address this limitation by two different means: First, technological features lies beyond the scope of our paper.
sampling across various job levels could broaden the per- Such research could add to a more comprehensive under-
ceptions and judgments on AI readiness. Second, we pro- standingoforganizationalnecessitiesascompaniesusually
pose to further explore organizations’ specifics for AI strivetoadoptandcombinemultiple(digital)technologies.
adoption, for instance, through in-depth case studies. This
12318 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
6 Conclusion Alsheibani SA, Cheung Y, Messom C (2019) Factors inhibiting the
adoption of artificial intelligence at organizational-level: a
preliminaryinvestigation.In:AMCIS2019Proceedings,Cancu´n
This paper provided a thorough conceptualization of
BaierL,Jo¨hrenF,SeebacherS(2019)Challengesinthedeployment
organizational AI readiness. We combined insights from and operation of machine learning in practice. In: ECIS 2019
interviews with 25AIexperts with findings fromscientific Proceedings,Stockholm-Uppsala
and practitioner literature to compile 18 AI readiness fac- Baslom MMM, Tong S (2019) Strategic management of organiza-
tional knowledge and employee’s awareness about artificial
tors and 58 illustrative indicators in five categories. Fur-
intelligence with mediating effect of learning climate. Int J
ther, we discussed that organizations must continuously ComputIntellSyst12:1585–1591
assess and develop their AI readiness in the AI adoption Bawack R, Wamba S, Carillo K (2019) Artificial intelligence in
process and described relevant aspects to consider. This practice: implications for information systems research. In:
AMCIS2019Proceedings,Cancu´n
includes AI’s nature as a GPT, the context- and purpose-
BhattacherjeeA(2012)Socialscienceresearch:principles,methods,
specifics, and the mutually reinforcing interplay of AI and practices, 2nd edn. CreateSpace Independent Publishing
readinessandAIadoption.Futureresearchshouldvalidate Platform,NorthCharleston
ourfindingsandexaminetheimpactsofcontingenciesand Boateng GO, Neilands TB, Frongillo EA, Melgar-Quin˜onez HR,
Young SL (2018) Best practices for developing and validating
prioritizing AI readiness factors on AI adoption success.
scalesforhealth,social,andbehavioralresearch:aprimer.Front
PublicHealth6:149–167
Acknowledgments This research was (in part) carried out in the Bresnahan TF, Trajtenberg M (1995) General purpose technologies
contextoftheProjectGroupBusiness&InformationSystemsEngi- ‘enginesofgrowth’?JEconom65:83–108
neeringoftheFraunhoferFIT. Brill TM, Munoz L, Miller RJ (2019) Siri, Alexa, and other digital
assistants: a study of customer satisfaction with artificial
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt intelligenceapplications.JMarkManag35:1401–1436
DEAL. Brynjolfsson E, McAfee A (2017) The business of artificial intelli-
gence: What it can – and cannot – do for your organization.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Harvard business review. https://starlab-alliance.com/wp-con
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, tent/uploads/2017/09/The-Business-of-Artificial-Intelligence.
adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,as pdf.Accessed12Mar2020
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the Brynjolfsson E, Mitchell T (2017) What can machine learning do?
source,providealinktotheCreativeCommonslicence,andindicate Workforceimplications.Science358:1530–1534
ifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdpartymaterialinthis BughinJ,HazanE,RamaswamyS,HenkeN,TrenchM,Dahlstro¨m
articleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicence,unless P,AllasT,ChuiM(2017)Artificialintelligence:thenextdigital
indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnot frontier. https://www.mckinsey.com/*/media/McKinsey/Indus
includedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicenceandyourintended tries/Advanced\%20Electronics/Our\%20Insights/How\%20artifi
useisnotpermittedbystatutoryregulationorexceedsthepermitted cial\%20intelligence\%20can\%20deliver\%20real\%20value\%
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 20to\%20companies/MGI-Artificial-Intelligence-Discussion-
holder.Toviewacopyofthislicence,visithttp://creativecommons. paper.ashx.Accessed23Feb2020
org/licenses/by/4.0/. Burton-Jones A, Grange C (2013) From use to effective use: a
representationtheoryperspective.InfSystRes24:632–658
CatalystFund(2020)Getstarted–AIreadinesstoolkit.https://www.
techstartups101.com/get-started-ai-readiness-toolkit. Accessed
References
23Feb2020
ChwelosP,BenbasatI,DexterAS(2001)Researchreport:empirical
Abdinnour-Helm S, Lengnick-Hall ML, Lengnick-Hall CA (2003) testofanEDIadoptionmodel.InfSystRes12:304–321
Pre-implementation attitudes and organizational readiness for ColsonE(2019)WhatAI-drivendecisionmakinglookslike.https://
implementing an enterprise resource planning system. Euro J hbr.org/2019/07/what-ai-driven-decision-making-looks-like.
OperRes146:258–273 Accessed23Feb2020
Aboelmaged MG (2014) Predicting e-readiness at firm-level: an CorbinJM,StraussA(1990)Groundedtheoryresearch:procedures,
analysis of technological, organizational and environmental canons,andevaluativecriteria.QualSociol13:3–21
(TOE) effects on e-maintenance readiness in manufacturing Damanpour F, Schneider M (2006) Phases of the adoption of
firms.IntJInfManag34:639–651 innovationinorganizations:effectsofenvironment,organization
A˚gerfalkPJ(2020)Artificialintelligenceasdigitalagency.EuroJInf andtopmanagers.BrJManag17:215–236
Syst29:1–8 Dattner B, Chamorro-Premuzic T, Buchband R, Schettler L (2019)
Agrawal A, Gans J, Goldfarb A (2018) Prediction machines: the ThelegalandethicalimplicationsofusingAIinhiring.https://
simple economics of artificial intelligence. Harvard Business hbr.org/2019/04/the-legal-and-ethical-implications-of-using-ai-
ReviewPress,Boston in-hiring.Accessed23Feb2020
Ajzen I (1991) The theory of planned behavior. Organ Behav Hum Davenport T (2018) From analytics to artificial intelligence. J Bus
DecisProc50:179–211 Anal1:73–80
Alshawi M (2007) Rethinking IT in construction and engineering. Davis F (1985) A technology acceptance model for empirically
Routledge,London testing new end-user information systems: theory and results.
Alsheibani S, Cheung Y, Messom C (2018) Artificial intelligence Sloan SchoolofManagement, Massachusetts Institute ofTech-
adoption: AI-readiness at firm-level. In: PACIS 2018 Proceed- nology,Massachusetts
ings,Yokohama DeVellisRF(2017)Scaledevelopment:theoryandapplications,4th
edn.Sage,ThousandOaks
123J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021) 19
DewiS,AhamatA(2018)Theroleofentrepreneurialorientationin LokugeS,SederaD,GroverV,DongmingX(2018)Organizational
achieving organization performance through business model readiness for digital innovation: development and empirical
innovationandassetrelationalcollaboration.HumSocSciRev calibrationofaconstruct.InfManag56:445–461
6:100–105 Magistretti S, Dell’Era C, Messeni Petruzzelli A (2019) How
FishbeinM,AjzenI(1975)Belief,attitude,intentionandbehavior:an intelligent is Watson? enabling digital transformation through
introduction to theory and research. Addison-Wesley series in artificialintelligence.BusHoriz62:819–829
socialpsychology.Addison-Wesley,Reading,Boston Microsoft (2020) Determine how ready your business is for AI.
FlickU,vonKardorffE,SteinkeI(2004)Acompaniontoqualitative https://info.microsoft.com/ww-landing-ai-maturity-model-web
research.Sage,London site.html?lcid=en-us.Accessed23Feb2020
Fountaine T, McCarthyB, Saleh T(2019)Building theAI-powered Molla A, Licker PS (2005) Perceived e-readiness factors in e-com-
organization.HarvBusRev97:62–73 merce adoption: an empirical investigation in a developing
Frambach RT, Schillewaert N (2002) Organizational innovation country.IntJElectronCommer10(1):83–110
adoption: a multi-level framework of determinants and oppor- MollaA,CooperV,PittayachawanS(2009)ITandeco-sustainabil-
tunitiesforfutureresearch.JBusRes55:163–176 ity: developing and validating a green IT readiness model. In:
Gallivan MJ (2001) Organizational adoption and assimilation of ICIS2009Proceedings,Phoenix
complextechnologicalinnovations.SIGMISDatabase32:51 Moore GC, Benbasat I (1991) Development of an instrument to
Gartner(2019)CIOagendasurvey.https://www.gartner.com/smarter measuretheperceptionsofadoptinganinformationtechnology
withgartner/3-barriers-to-ai-adoption/.Accessed26June2020 innovation.InfSystRes2:192–222
Ghosh B, Daugherty PR, Wilson HJ, Burden A (2019) Taking a Myers MD, Newman M (2007) The qualitative interview in IS
systemsapproachtoadoptingAI.HarvBusRevMay research:examiningthecraft.InfOrgan17:2–26
Gopalakrishnan S, Damanpour F (1997) A review of innovation Nguyen DK, Broekhuizen T, Dong JQ, Verhoef P (2019) Digital
research in economics, sociology and technology management. readiness: construct development and empirical validation. In:
Omega25:15–28 ICIS2019Proceedings,Munich
GroopmanJ(2018)AIreadiness:fiveareasbusinessesmustprepare Oliveira T, Martins M (2011) Literature review of information
forsuccessinartificialintelligence.https://www.kaleidoinsights. technologyadoptionmodelsatfirmlevel.EJISE14:110–121
com/order-reports/artificial-intelligence-ai-readiness/. Accessed PAOfficeofAdministration(2018)Artificialintelligenceassessment
23Feb2020 tool. https://www.oa.pa.gov/Policies/Documents/rfd\_bus012a.
HameedMA,CounsellS,SwiftS(2012)Aconceptualmodelforthe xlsx.Accessed23Feb2020
process of IT innovation adoption in organizations. J Eng Pringle T, Zoller E (2018) How to achieve AI maturity and why it
TechnolManag29:358–390 matters: an AI maturity assessment model and road map for
Helfat CE, Peteraf MA (2003) The dynamic resource-based view: CSPs. https://www.amdocs.com/sites/default/files/filefield\_
capabilitylifecycles.StrategManagJ24:997–1010 paths/ai-maturity-model-whitepaper.pdf.Accessed23Feb2020
Hofmann P, Jo¨hnk J, Protschky D, Urbach N (2020) Developing ProvostF,FawcettT(2013)Datascienceanditsrelationshiptobig
purposefulAIusecases–astructuredmethodanditsapplication dataanddata-drivendecisionmaking.BigData1:51–59
inprojectmanagement.In:Wirtschaftsinformatik2020Proceed- Pumplun L, Tauchert C, and Heidt M (2019) A new organizational
ings,Potsdam chassis for artificial intelligence – exploring organizational
Hummer W, Muthusamy V, Rausch T, Dube P, El Maghraoui K, readiness factors. In: ECIS 2019 Proceedings, Stockholm-
Murthi A, Oum P (2019) ModelOps: cloud-based lifecycle Uppsala
management for reliable and trusted AI. In: IC2E 2019 Robey D, Im G, Wareham J (2008) Theoretical foundations of
Proceedings,Prague empiricalresearchoninterorganizationalsystems:assessingpast
Iacovou CL, Benbasat I, Dexter AS (1995) electronic data inter- contributionsandguidingfuturedirections.JAIS9:497–518
change and small organizations: adoption and impact of RogersEM(2003)Diffusionofinnovations,5thedn.FreePress,New
technology.MISQ19:465 York
IansitiM,LakhaniKR(2020)CompetingintheageofAI.HarvBus Russell SJ, Norvig P, Davis E, Edwards D (2016) Artificial
RevJanuary–February:60–67 intelligence:amodernapproach,3rdedn.Pearson,Edinburgh
Intel(2018)TheAIreadinessmodel:judginganorganization’sability Saldan˜aJ(2013)Thecodingmanualforqualitativeresearchers,2nd
to generate business value from artificial intelligence. https:// edn.Sage,LosAngeles
www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/ Schultze U, Avital M (2011) Designing interviews to generate rich
white-papers/ai-readiness-model-whitepaper.pdf. Accessed 23 dataforinformationsystemsresearch.InfOrgan21:1–16
Feb2020 ShahrasbiN,Pare´G(2014)Rethinkingtheconceptoforganizational
Jarrahi MH (2018) Artificial intelligence and the future of work: readiness: what can is researchers learn from the change
Human-AI symbiosis in organizational decision making. Bus managementfield?In:AMCIS2014Proceedings,Savannah
Horiz61:577–586 SharmaY(2003)Thecontingenteffectsofmanagementsupportand
JovanovicB,RousseauPL(2005)Generalpurposetechnologies.vol task interdependence on successful information systems imple-
1.Elsevier,Amsterdam,pp1181–1224 mentation.MISQ27:533
KruseL,WunderlichN,BeckR(2019)Artificialintelligenceforthe Sidi F, Shariat Panahy PH, Affendey LS, Jabar MA, Ibrahim H,
financial services industry: what challenges organizations to Mustapha A (2012) Data quality: a survey of data quality
succeed.In:HICSS2019Proceedings dimensions.In:CAMP’12,KualaLumpur
LinY,JunZ,HongyanM,ZhongweiZ,ZhanfangF(2018)Amethod Snyder-Halpern R (2001) Indicators of organizational readiness for
ofextractingthesemi-structureddataimplicationrules.Procedia clinical information technology/systems innovation: a Delphi
CompSci131:706–716 study.IntJMedInform63:179–204
LippertSK,DavisM(2006)Aconceptualmodelintegratingtrustinto Subramanian A, Nilakanta S (1996) Organizational innovativeness:
planned change activities to enhance technology adoption exploring the relationship between organizational determinants
behavior.JInfSci32:434–448 of innovation, types of innovations, and measures of organiza-
tionalperformance.Omega24:631–647
12320 J.Jo¨hnketal.:ReadyorNot,AIComes:AnInterviewStudyofOrganizationalAIReadinessFactors,BusInfSystEng63(1):5–20(2021)
TambeP,CappelliP,YakubovichV(2018)Artificialintelligencein Weiner BJ (2009) A theory of organizational readiness for change.
human resources management: challenges and a path forward. ImplementSci4:1–9
CalifManagRev61:15–42 Yang Z, Sun J, Zhang Y, Wang Y (2015) Understanding SaaS
Tornatzky LG, Fleischer M, Chakrabarti AK (eds) (1990) The adoption from the perspective of organizational users: a tripod
processes of technological innovation, 4th edn. Lexington readinessmodel.ComputHumBehav45:254–264
Books,Lexington YuanF,WoodmanRW(2010)Innovativebehaviorintheworkplace:
Watson J, Hatfield S, Wright D, Howard M, Witherick D, Coe L, theroleofperformanceandimageoutcomeexpectations.Acad
HortonR(2019)Automationwithintelligence:reimaginingthe ManagJ53:323–342
organisation in the ’age of with’. https://www2.deloitte.com/
content/dam/Deloitte/tw/Documents/strategy/tw-Automation-
with-intelligence.pdf.Accessed8Mar2020
123