Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 00, 00, 0–0 Downloaded
doi:10.1093/cjres/rsz022
from
The wrong kind of AI? Artificial intelligence and the
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
future of labour demand
Daron Acemoglua and Pascual Restrepob
aMIT, Cambridge, MA, USA, daron@mit.edu
bBoston University, Boston, MA, USA, pascual@bu.edu
Received on May 30, 2019; editorial decision on October 16, 2019; accepted on November 18, 2019
Artificial intelligence (AI) is set to influence every aspect of our lives, not least the way pro-
duction is organised. AI, as a technology platform, can automate tasks previously performed
by labour or create new tasks and activities in which humans can be productively employed.
Recent technological change has been biased towards automation, with insufficient focus
on creating new tasks where labour can be productively employed. The consequences of
this choice have been stagnating labour demand, declining labour share in national income,
rising inequality and lowering productivity growth. The current tendency is to develop AI in
the direction of further automation, but this might mean missing out on the promise of the
‘right’ kind of AI, with better economic and social outcomes.
Keywords: automation, artificial intelligence, jobs, inequality, innovation, labour demand,
productivity, tasks, technology, wages
JEL Classifications:J23, J24
by
Artificial intelligence (AI) is one of the most we can still shape the direction of AI research
Bibliotheque
promising technologies currently being de- and the future of work.
veloped and deployed. Broadly speaking, AI
refers to the study and development of “intel-
AI as a technology platform
ligent (machine) agents”, which are machines,
interuniversitaire
softwares or algorithms that act intelligently Human (or natural) intelligence comprises sev-
by recognising and responding to their envir- eral different types of mental activities. These
onment.1 There is a lot of excitement, some include simple computation, data processing,
hype and a fair bit of apprehension about pattern recognition, prediction, various types of
what AI will mean for our security, society problem solving, judgment, creativity, and com-
de
and economy. But a critical question has been munication. Early AI, pioneered in the 1950s by
sante
largely overlooked: are we investing in the researchers from computer science, psychology
“right” type of AI, the kind with the greatest po- and economics, such as Marvin Minsky, Seymour user
tential for raising productivity and generating Papert, John McCarthy, Herbert Simon and
on
broad-based prosperity? We do not have a de- Allen Newell, sought to develop machine intel-
03
finitive answer right now—nobody does. But ligence capable of performing all of these dif-
January
this is the right time to ask this question while ferent types of mental activities.2 The goal was
2020
© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Cambridge Political Economy Society.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.comDownloaded
Acemoglu and Restrepo
nothing short of creating truly intelligent ma- Even if we focus on its narrow version, AI from
chines. Herbert Simon and Allen Newell, for should be thought of as a technology plat-
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
example, claimed in 1958 “there are now in the form—there are many ways AI technology can
world machines that think, that learn and that be developed as a commercial or production
create. Moreover, their ability to do these things technology, with widely varying applications.
is going to increase rapidly until—in a visible This matters greatly because it implies that the
future—the range of problems they can handle economic and social consequences of AI tech-
will be coextensive with the range to which the nologies are not preordained but depend on
human mind has been applied.”3 how we decide to advance and build on this
These ambitious goals were soon dashed. AI platform. To some degree, this is true of all clus-
came back into fashion in the 1990s, but with ters of technologies, but it is more emphatically
a different and more modest ambition: to rep- so for AI.4 To see this, contrast it with a related
licate and then improve upon human intelli- but distinct new technology, robotics. Robotics
gence in pattern recognition and prediction often makes use of AI and other digital tech-
(pre-AI computers were already better than nologies for processing data, but is distin-
humans in computation and data processing). guished from other digital technologies by its
Many decision problems and activities we rou- focus on interacting with the physical world
tinely engage in can be viewed as examples (moving around, transforming, rearranging or
of pattern recognition and prediction. These joining objects). Industrial robots are already
include recognising faces (from visual data), widespread in many manufacturing industries
recognising speech (from auditory data), rec- and in some retail and wholesale establish-
ognising abstract patterns in data we are pre- ments. But their economic use is quite specific,
sented with, and making decisions on the and centres on automation of narrow tasks, that
basis of past experience and current informa- is, substituting machines for certain specific ac-
tion. Though there are researchers working on tivities and functions previously performed by
“Artificial General Intelligence”, much of the humans.5
research and almost all commercial applica-
tions of AI are in these more modest domains
Implications of technology for work
vant applications are numerous and varied. The Bibliotheque
big breakthroughs and the renewed excitement How do new technologies impact the nature of
in AI are coming from advances in hardware production and work? Employment and wages
and algorithms that enable the processing and of different types of workers? The standard
analysis of vast amounts of unstructured data approach, both in popular discussions and in interuniversitaire
(for example, speech data that cannot be repre- academic writings, presumes that any advance
sented in the usual structured ways, such as in that increases productivity (value added per
simple, Excel-like databases). Central to this re- worker) also tends to raise the demand for
naissance of AI have been methods of machine labour, and thus employment and wages. Of
learning (which are the statistical techniques course, technological progress might lead to de
that enable computers and algorithms to learn, job loss in some sectors. But even when that sante
predict and perform tasks from large amounts happens, the standard narrative goes, other sec-
of data without being explicitly programmed) tors will expand and contribute to overall em- user
and what is called “deep learning” (algorithms ployment and wage growth. Moreover, even if
on
that use multi-layered programs, such as neural technological progress benefits some workers
03
nets, for improved machine learning, statistical more than others and increases inequality, the January
inference and optimisation). standard approach still predicts that it will
2020
Page 2 of 11Downloaded
The wrong kind of AI?
tend to raise the labour demand for all types not reduce overall labour demand. A second from
of workers.6 conclusion is that whether they reduce overall
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
This view is critically underpinned by the labour demand depends on the strength of the
way in which the economic impact of new tech- productivity effect.
nology is conceptualised—as enabling labour This last observation has important implica-
to become more productive in pretty much all tions: contrary to popular claims that the future
of the activities and tasks that it performs. Yet, of labour is threatened by “brilliant” new tech-
this not only lacks descriptive realism (what nologies, the greater danger for labour comes
technology makes labour uniformly more pro- from technology that is not raising productivity
ductive in everything?), but may paint an ex- sufficiently. In particular, if new automation
cessively rosy picture of the implications of new technologies are not great but just “so-so” (just
technologies. Indeed, in such a world Luddites’ good enough to be adopted but not so much
concerns about the disruptive and job displacing more productive than the labour they are re-
implications of technology would be misplaced, placing), there is a double jeopardy for labour—
and they would have smashed all of those ma- there is a displacement effect, taking passed
chines in vain. away from labour, but no powerful productivity
The reality of technological change is rather gains redressing some of the decline in labour
different. Many new technologies—those we demand generated by the displacement effects.
call automation technologies—are not intended Is this far-fetched? Not really. We have previ-
to increase labour’s productivity, but are ex- ously studied the implications of one of the most
plicitly aimed at replacing it by substituting important automation technologies, industrial
cheaper capital (machines) in a range of tasks robots.9 Industrial robots are not technologies
performed by humans.7 As a result, automa- aimed at increasing labour’s productivity but
tion technologies, by displacing workers from are designed to automate tasks that were previ-
the tasks they were previously performing, al- ously performed by production workers on the
ways reduce the labour’s share in value added. factory floor. The evidence is fairly clear that
Put differently, these technologies raise prod- industries where more industrial robots are
uctivity by more than wages and employment. introduced experience declines in labour de-
They may even reduce overall labour demand mand (especially for production workers) and
by
(and thus reduce wages, employment or both). sizable falls in their labour share. More import- Bibliotheque
Whether they reduce overall labour demand antly, local labour markets more exposed to in-
turns on the strength of the productivity effect dustrial robots, such as Detroit MI or Defiance
that they create compared with their direct OH, have significantly lower employment and
displacement effect. The productivity effect is wage growth. Furthermore, the declines in interuniversitaire
simple to understand: automation technologies wages and employment fell much more heavily
typically reduce costs and as costs decline, firms on workers from the lower half of the earnings
have an incentive to expand output, which in- distribution and those with less than a college
creases the demand for labour coming from degree, thus exacerbating inequality. All of this
non-automated tasks. Equally, lower costs for is despite the fact that industry-level data also de
automated products increase the demand for suggest productivity gains from robots.10 sante
other complementary products, still produced Automation in general and robots in par-
with labour-intensive methods.8 ticular also increase inequality through two user
A first conclusion from this conceptual distinct channels. First, by reducing the labour
on
framework is therefore that automation tech- share, automation increases the relative in-
03
nologies always reduce the labour share relative comes of capital owners who tend to be richer January
to capital (and other factors), and may or may than those relying on labour income. Second,
2020
Page 3 of 11Downloaded
Acemoglu and Restrepo
currently automated tasks typically employ occupations but also a range of more specialised from
low-skill or medium-skill workers, and declines blue-collar and white-collar jobs that increased
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
in their employment and wages tend to con- productivity, the demand for labour and the
tribute to inequality. In the case of industrial labour share in manufacturing and services.14
robots, both of these channels appear to have Occupations featuring new tasks have been at
contributed to greater inequality.11 the forefront of employment growth in the US
economy in the post-war era as well.15
This perspective then suggests a different re-
Automation and new tasks in history
interpretation of the history of technology and
Automation is not a recent phenomenon. Many a different way of thinking about the future of
important breakthroughs in the history of tech- work—as a race between automation and new,
nology have centred around automation. Most labour-intensive tasks. Labour demand has not
notably, the spectacular advances in the early increased steadily over the last two centuries
stages of the Industrial Revolution in Britain because of technologies that have made la-
were aimed at automating weaving and spinning, bour more productive in everything. Rather,
and the focus then shifted to the factory floors many new technologies have sought to elim-
of other industries.12 Other prominent examples inate labour from tasks in which it previously
of automation are the mechanisation of agri- specialised. All the same, labour has benefited
culture and the interchangeable parts system of from advances in technology because other
American manufacturing (for skilled workers). technologies have simultaneously enabled the
But if automation tends to reduce the labour introduction of new labour-intensive tasks.
share and has mixed effects on labour demand, These new tasks have done more than just re-
why did the labour share remain roughly constant instate labour as a central input into the pro-
and productivity growth go hand-in-hand with duction process; they have also played a vital
commensurate wage growth over the last two role in productivity growth.
centuries? To understand this relationship, we Viewed from this perspective, employment
need to recognise different types of techno- and wage growth have been disappointing over
logical advances contributing to productivity the last two decades partly because product-
growth. Historically, as automation technologies ivity growth has been weak, and even more
by
were being introduced, other technological ad- importantly because new tasks have failed to Bibliotheque
vances simultaneously reorganised production, materialise.16 The future of work will be much
invented new products and created new tasks brighter if we can mobilise more of the tech-
in which labour had a competitive advantage. nologies that increase labour demand and en-
These developments generated new activities sure vigorous productivity growth. interuniversitaire
for labour—tasks in which human labour could
be reinstated into the production process—and
Varieties of AI
robustly contributed to productivity growth as
new tasks improved the division of labour.13 The This perspective provides a new way of thinking
episode of agricultural mechanisation, which about the economic opportunities and chal- de
started in the second half of the 19th century, lenges posed by AI. Most AI researchers and sante
vividly illustrates this pattern. Though mechan- economists studying its consequences view it as
isation reduced the labour share and employ- a way of automating yet more tasks. No doubt, user
ment in agriculture, overall labour demand rose AI has this capability, and most of its appli-
on
because a range of new tasks were introduced cations to date have been of this mould—for
03
in both manufacturing and services. In fact, this example, image recognition, speech recogni- January
period witnessed not only the rise of clerical tion, translation, accounting, recommendation
2020
Page 4 of 11Downloaded
The wrong kind of AI?
systems and customer support. But we do not the core tasks in education. But using AI to from
need to accept this as the primary way that AI create new tasks would be a different way of
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
can be and indeed ought to be used. productively deploying this new technology
First, if all we do is continue down the path of platform. Consider, for example, classroom
automation, with no counterbalancing innov- teaching. This has not changed for over
ations to generate new tasks, the implications 200 years. A teacher teaches to the whole
for employment, wages and inequality could be class, even if he or she or an aide may oc-
depressing. It will not be the end of work any- casionally engage in one-on-one instruction
time soon,17 but the trend towards lower labour or provide help for some subset of students.
share, greater inequality and anaemic growth in There is evidence, however, suggesting that
labour demand will continue—with potentially many students have different “learning
disastrous consequences for income inequality styles”, and what works for one student may
and social cohesion. not work for another, and even what works
Second, as we go deeper and deeper into for one student in one subject will not work
AI-based automation, we are moving into for him or her in every subject.18
areas in which human labour is quite good (for At the moment, individualised teaching, tar-
example think of image and speech recogni- geted and adapted to each student or for small
tion or hand–eye coordination), and machine subsets of students, is impossible, and not just
productivity, at least to start with, is not always because the resources in terms of teacher time
impressive, to say the least. Automation tech- and skill are lacking. It is mostly because nobody
nologies aimed at substituting machines for hu- has (and cannot easily acquire and process the
mans in these tasks are thus likely to be of the information) to determine a student’s optimal
so-so kind. As a result, we cannot even count on learning style in a specific subject or topic. AI
powerful productivity gains to increase our living can change this. AI software can be designed
standards and contribute to labour demand. to collect and process in real-time data about
But it does not have to be this way. Since AI the specific reactions, difficulties and successes
is not just a narrow set of technologies with students have in different subject areas, espe-
specific, pre-determined applications and func- cially when taught in different styles, and then
tionalities but a technology platform, it can be make recommendations for improved individu-
by
deployed for much more than automation; it can alised teaching. The potential improvements Bibliotheque
be used to restructure the production process in in terms of educational productivity could be
a way that creates many new, high-productivity quite large (we just do not know). Societal
tasks for labour. If this type of “reinstating AI” benefits could exceed these direct benefits as
is a possibility, there would be potentially large AI-powered teaching methods may do better in interuniversitaire
societal gains both in terms of improved prod- terms of providing students with skills that will
uctivity and greater labour demand (which will be more valued in future labour markets (ra-
not only create more inclusive growth but also ther than the more backward-looking curricula
avoid the social problems spawned by jobless- and teaching emphasis currently prevailing in
ness and wage declines). schools). Developing and deploying such tech- de
Consider a few examples of how AI applica- nologies would increase the demand for human sante
tions can create new tasks for labour. labour in teaching as well—we would need
more teachers with diverse skills to do the in- user
• Education: Education is one of the areas dividualised teaching, even with help from AI on
with the least AI penetration. That may software and other technologies. 03
be partly because automation is not an at- • Healthcare: The situation in healthcare January
tractive or even feasible option for most of is similar. Though there has been more
2020
Page 5 of 11Downloaded
Acemoglu and Restrepo
effort to introduce digital technologies into contribute to productivity.19 from
healthcare, the focus has not been on cre-
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
ating tasks in which humans can be product- Notably, the examples of new tasks men-
ively employed (in fact, some of the uses of tioned above go well beyond what are some-
AI, for example, in radiology, are very much times emphasised as “enablers” of AI—human
in the mould of automation). AI applications tasks involved in training and monitoring
that collect and analyse information can sig- new machines as they automate what the rest
nificantly empower nurses, technicians and of us do. This is critical; work in just enabling
other healthcare providers to offer a wider AI is unlikely to generate sufficient new tasks
range of services and more real-time health and demand for human labour to undergird
advice, diagnosis and treatment. The bene- broad-based prosperity.
fits in terms of greater labour demand and
productivity are very similar to the educa-
Why the wrong kind of AI?
tion case.
• Augmented reality: The third area in which If there are potentially productive and profit-
the use of AI can significantly change the able uses of AI beyond simple automation, can
production process in a way that may be fa- we count on market forces and innovation by
vourable to labour is through augmented and existing companies to take us there? Is there
virtual-reality technologies in manufacturing. any reason to worry that AI applications with
Most advanced manufacturing technologies the promise of reinstating human labour will
of the last three decades have focussed on not be exploited and resources will continue to
automation. But companies such as Amazon pour instead into the wrong kind of AI?
and Tesla have discovered that automating Economists tend to place great trust in the
all factory-floor and manual tasks is not market’s ability to allocate resources in the
economically rational because some tasks most efficient way. But most experts recognise
are still more productively performed by that the market’s star does not shine as brightly
humans. One difficulty facing companies when it comes to innovation. There are sev-
introducing industrial robots, however, is eral reasons for market failures in innovation
that these new technologies do not neces- in general, as well as some specific reasons that
by
sarily integrate well with humans for at least are important in the context of AI. Bibliotheque
two reasons. First, most robotics technology
is cordoned off from workers because of • Innovation creates externalities—not just
safety concerns. Second, human work may the innovator, but also the workers who use
not mesh with the degree of precision re- the new technology, the firms that adopt it interuniversitaire
quired by robotics technology. Augmented and, most importantly, other firms and re-
reality technologies—which use interactive searchers building on it in the future will
interfaces in order to increase the ability benefit from it. Markets do not do a good job
of humans to perceive, monitor and con- in the presence of such externalities.
trol objects—might enable workers to work • Markets struggle when there are alternative, de
alongside machines and perform high preci- competing technological paradigms. When sante
sion production and integrated design tasks. one paradigm is ahead of the other, both re-
This will not just help workers keep some searchers and companies tend to follow that user
of the tasks that might have otherwise been paradigm, even if an alternative could be
on
automated; it could also create new tasks in more productive. Moreover, in such a situ-
03
which humans, augmented by digital tech- ation, once the wrong paradigm pulls ahead, January
nology and sensors, can be employed and it may be very difficult to reverse this trend
2020
Page 6 of 11Downloaded
The wrong kind of AI?
and benefit from the possibilities offered by which are the source of most of the resources from
the alternative paradigm. To the extent that going into AI, have focussed on automation
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
different approaches to AI constitute alter- and removing the (fallible) human element
native, competing paradigms, our trust in the from the production process. This last con-
market mechanism getting it right should be sideration may have become even more crit-
even lower.20 ical as the vast resources of several leading
• To correct market failures in innovation, companies are pouring into academia and
the US government has historically used shaping the teaching and research missions
public–private partnerships to encourage of leading universities. It is no surprise that
socially beneficial research. It has played an the best minds in the current generation are
important role in many leading technolo- gravitating towards computer science, AI
gies, including the Internet, sensors, phar- and machine learning, but with a heavy em-
maceuticals, biotech and nanotechnology.21 phasis on automation. An ecosystem that is
But more recently, the US government has biased would become much more stifling for
been more frugal in its support for research the direction of technological change when
and more timid in its determination to steer it becomes all-encompassing.
the direction of technological change. Part of • There are also additional factors that may
this shift is due to the reduction in resources have distorted choices over what types of
devoted to government support of innov- AI applications to develop. The first one
ation and the increasingly dominant role is that if employment creation has a social
of the private sector in setting the agenda value beyond what is in the GDP statistics
in high-tech areas (can government offi- (for instance, because employed people
cials and researchers meaningfully influence are happier and become better citizens, or
the direction of inventive activity in Silicon because broad-based growth in labour de-
Valley?). This shift will further discourage mand improves income inequality), this so-
research related to future promise (that is cial value will be ignored by the market. The
not immediately reflected in profitability) second is related to the tax policies adopted
and other social objectives (such as reducing in the United States and other Western na-
carbon emissions or, more relevant to this tions, which subsidise capital and invest-
by
essay, the creation of employment opportun- ment while taxing employment. This makes Bibliotheque
ities for a broad range of workers). using machines instead of labour more prof-
• Innovation does not just respond to economic itable, and these profits encourage not just
incentives. Several noneconomic rewards af- automation but also automation research.
fect what types of technologies attract the at- Finally, and complementing these factors, to interuniversitaire
tention and imagination of researchers. It is the extent that firms take into account the
possible that the ecosystem around the most cost of labour (the wage rate), which tends
creative clusters in the United States, such as to be higher than the social opportunity cost
Silicon Valley, excessively rewards automa- of labour because of imperfections in the
tion and pays insufficient attention to other labour market, they will have additional in- de
uses of frontier technologies. This may be centives for adopting and developing auto- sante
partly because of the values and interests of mation technologies beyond what is socially
leading researchers (consider, for example, optimal. user
the ethos of companies like Tesla that have • Another set of factors blocking the path
on
ceaselessly tried to automate everything). It of novel AI applications reinstating labour
03
is also partly because the prevailing business is that these new technologies might need January
model and vision of the large tech companies, critical complementary inputs that are not
2020
Page 7 of 11Downloaded
Acemoglu and Restrepo
forthcoming. Take the example of educa- Rather than undergirding productivity growth, from
tion mentioned above. It is not only that employment and shared prosperity, rampant
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
developing AI to create new labour-intensive automation would contribute to joblessness,
tasks in education is not viewed the frontier anaemic growth and inequality.
or one of the “cool” areas of research, say
compared with facial recognition. It is also
Social causes and implications of
that complementary skills and resources to
the wrong kind of AI
make this type of reinstating AI profitable
may be missing completely. Educational ap- Much has been written about the dangers that
plications of AI would necessitate new, more unregulated AI may pose in the hands of com-
flexible skills from teachers (beyond what is panies or governments intent on monitoring
available and what is being invested in now), and controlling behaviour or independence
and they would need additional resources to of actors wishing to spread disinformation.22
hire more teachers to work with these new Without taking away from the importance
AI technologies (after all, that is the point of of these issues, this essay highlights other so-
the new technology, to create new tasks and cial aspects of this new set of technologies. We
additional demand for teachers). In the case have already emphasised the negative social
of healthcare, limited resources are not the implications of automation in general and the
problem (the share of national income de- wrong kind of AI focussing just on automating
voted to health is continuing to grow), but the labour-intensive tasks because they tend to
requisite complementary changes are likely create loss of employment, wage declines or
to be organisational. In fact, highlighting stagnation and greater inequality.
other barriers to the use of new technologies These effects would become even more costly
to create new tasks, the way that hospitals, to the extent that loss of employment oppor-
insurance companies and the whole medical tunities, stagnant wages and rising inequality
profession, as represented by the American have adverse political implications. These im-
Medical Association, is organised is likely to plications could include both mounting popular
be in the way. If empowering, and increasing discontent that can sometimes fan the flames of
the productivity of, nurses and technicians disruptive populist movements,23 and growing by
is perceived to reduce the demand for the economic dominance of certain individuals, Bibliotheque
services of doctors or challenge the current corporations or segments of the business world,
business model of hospitals, it will be strenu- who can then gain disproportionate political
ously resisted. influence or even political dominance.24 These
political costs may need to be included in interuniversitaire
All in all, even though we currently lack de- evaluating the broader desirability of different
finitive evidence that research and corporate types of AI practices and policies.
resources today are being excessively directed The wrong kind of AI does not just have pol-
towards the “wrong” kind of AI, the market itical implications, but its continued dominance
for innovation gives no compelling reason to may have political causes as well. The wrong de
expect an efficient balance between different kind of AI, primarily focussing on automation, sante
types of AI. If at this critical juncture insuffi- tends to generate benefits for a narrow part
user
cient attention is devoted to inventing and cre- of society that is already rich and politically
ating demand for, rather than just replacing, powerful, including highly skilled professionals on
labour, that would be the “wrong” kind of AI and companies whose business model is centred 03
from the social and economic point of view. on automation and data. If so, the influence of January
2020
Page 8 of 11Downloaded
The wrong kind of AI?
these actors may further propagate the dom- 5 See Ayres and Miller (1983), Groover et al. (1986), from
inant position of this type of AI. For example, Graetz and Michaels (2015) and Acemoglu and
https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
corporations that reckon that their own market Restrepo (2018b).
position and profits will be best served by AI 6 See Acemoglu (2002).
targeted at large-scale automation and would be 7 This approach is developed in Zeira (1998), Autor,
hurt by new AI technologies creating new tasks, Levy and Murnane (2003), Acemoglu and Autor
wage growth and opportunities for competing (2011) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a,b,c,
firms may naturally lend their research and pol- 2019).
itical weight towards AI targeting automation. 8 One intuition for why the productivity effect, how-
Whether this political channel has had any effect ever large, can never restore the labour share back to
so far and may play more of a role in the future its pre-automation level is that displaced workers are
in the path of AI technologies is an interesting deployed in non-automated tasks, which runs into
and important area for future inquiry. diminishing returns (see Acemoglu and Restrepo,
2018a, 2019).
9 Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b).
Conclusion
10 Our conceptual framework implies that the ef-
AI is set to influence every aspect of our lives, fects of automation technologies on employment
not least the way production is organised in and wages will not be uniform across different
instances of their adoption or across distinct
modern economies. But we should not assume
types of technologies. Robots may create larger
that, left to its own devices, the right types of AI
displacement effects than other automation
will be developed and implemented. Though
technologies, and the same robotic technology
many today worry about the security risks and
in disparate social and economic settings may
other unforeseen (often non-economic) conse-
generate differently sized productivity effects.
quences of AI, we have argued that there are Indeed, studies focussing on other periods and
prima facie reasons for worrying about the using different sources of empirical variation find
wrong kind of AI, from an economic point of similar declines in labour share from automation,
view, becoming all the rage and the basis of but not always negative effects on employment.
future technological development. The con- See, for example, Graetz and Michaels (2019),
siderable promise of AI implies that we need who exploited cross-country, cross-industry vari- by
ation, and Dauth et al. (2019), who use the same
to devote care and serious thought to its im- Bibliotheque
strategy as Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b) but in
plications and to the question of how best to
Germany rather than in the United States.
develop this promising technology platform—
11 See Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b).
before it is too late.
12 See Mantoux (1927) and Mokyr (1992). interuniversitaire
13 Some new technologies also contribute to the
Endnote
productivity of labour directly. Though it is diffi-
1 See Russell and Norvig (2009), Neapolitan and Jiang cult to systematically decompose the contributions
(2018) and Agarwal, Gans and Goldfarb (2018). of directly “labour-augmenting” technologies and
new tasks (broadly construed to include new activ-
2 See Nilsson (2009) for the history of AI. de
ities for labour resulting from product innovation
sante
3 Forester (1985, 86). and reorganisations), there are two arguments for
4 Bessen et al. (2018) report that many commer- the importance of new tasks. First, Acemoglu and
user
cial AI startups view their technology as capable of Restrepo (2019) provide a decomposition sug-
“enhancing human capabilities”, while many others gesting that labour-augmenting technologies have on
recognise that their technologies have a significant played a relatively minor role in the US economy 03
automation component. since 1947. This is both because of empirical reasons January
2020
Page 9 of 11Downloaded
Acemoglu and Restrepo
(related to changes in industry labour shares) and References from
also because such technologies impact the la-
Acemoglu, D. (2002) Technical change, inequality, https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
bour share only indirectly (working via the elas-
and the labor market, Journal of Economic
ticity of substitution between capital and labour). Literature, 40: 7–72.
Second, the conceptual framework in Acemoglu Acemoglu, D. (2012) Diversity and technological
and Restrepo (2018a, 2019) clarifies that the rela- progress. In The Rate and Direction of Inventive
tive standing of labour cannot be reinstated just by Activity Revisited, pp. 319–360. University of
labour-augmenting advances and instead necessi- Chicago Press.
tates the creation of new tasks where labour has a Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. (2011) Skills, tasks
and technologies: implications for employment
comparative advantage relative to capital.
and earnings, Handbook of Labor Economics, 4:
14 Rasmussen (1982), Olmstead and Rhode (2001) 1043–1171.
and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019). Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. (2012) Why Nations
15 Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a). Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty.
New York, NY: Crown Busi.
16 Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019).
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018a) The race
17 See Dreyfus (1992) and Autor (2015). between man and machine: implications of tech-
nology for growth, factor shares and employment,
18 See Allport (1937), Cassidy (2004), Honey and
American Economic Review, 108: 1488–1542.
Mumford (1986) and Ramirez and Casteneda (1974).
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018b) Robots and
For recent evidence based on randomised control
jobs: evidence from US labor markets, Journal of
trials consistent with these ideas, see Muralidharan, Political Economy, doi:10.3386/w23285
Singh and Ganimian (2019). Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018c) Modeling
19 See Ong and Nee (2013), Kellner (2018) and https:// automation, AEA Papers & Proceedings, 108:
48–53.
www.ge.com/reports/game-augmented-reality-
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2018d) Artificial
helping-factory-workers-become-productive/.
intelligence, automation and work. In The
20 See Nelson and Winter (1977), Dosi (1982) and Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda,
Acemoglu (2012). pp. 197–236. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
21 Mazzucato (2015).
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2019) Automation
22 See, for example, Harari (2018), Lanier (2018), and new tasks: how technology changes labor de-
Pasquale (2015) and Zuboff (2019). mand, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33: 3–30.
23 See Judis (2016) on the effects of economic hard- Agarwal, A., Gans J. S. and Goldfarb, J. S. (2018) by
Prediction Machines: The Simple Economics of
ship and inequality on populism. Bibliotheque
Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge MA: Harvard
24 See, for example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) Business Review.
and Stiglitz (2012) on the political implications of Allport, G. W. (1937) Personality: A Psychological
economic inequality. Interpretation. Holt and Co.
Autor, D. H. (2015) Why are there still so many jobs? interuniversitaire
The history and future of workplace automation,
Acknowledgements Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29: 3–30.
Autor, D. H., Levy, S. M. and Murnane, R. J. (2003)
We thank Chris Ackerman, David Autor, Erik The skill content of recent technological change:
Brynjolfsson, Stu Feldman, Mike Piore, Jim an empirical exploration, The Quarterly Journal of
Poterba, Hal Varian and two referees and the edi- Economics, 118: 1279–1333. de
Ayres, R. U. and Miller, S. M. (1983) Robots: tors of the journal for useful comments. We grate- sante
Applications and Social Implications. Ballinger
fully acknowledge financial support from Google,
Publishing Co.
Microsoft, the Sloan Foundation, the Toulouse user
Bessen, J. E., Impink S. M., Reichensperger, L. and
Network on Information Technology, the Schmidt
Seamans, S. M. (2018) The Business of AI Startups. on
Sciences Foundation, the Smith Richardson BU School of Law, Law & Economics Series
03
Foundation, IBM, Accenture and the National Paper No. 18-28. Available at: https://ssrn.com/
January
Science Foundation. abstract=32932.
2020
Page 10 of 11Downloaded
The wrong kind of AI?
Cassidy, S. (2004) Learning styles: an overview Mazzucato, M. (2015) The Entrepreneurial State. from
of theories, models, and measures, Educational Anthem Press.
Psychology, 24: 419–444. Mokyr, J. (1992) The Lever of Riches: Technological https://academic.oup.com/cjres/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/cjres/rsz022/5680462
Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., Südekum, J. and Creativity and Economic Progress. Oxford
Woessner, N. (2019) German Robots—The Impact University Press.
of Industrial Robots on Workers. Institute for Muralidharan, K, Singh, A. and Ganimian, A. J.
Employment Research Discussion Paper. (2019) Disrupting education? Experimental evi-
Dosi, G. (1982) Technology paradigms and techno- dence on technology-aided instruction in India,
logical trajectories, Research Policy, 11: 147–162. American Economic Review, 109: 1426–1460.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1992) What Computers Still Can’t Do: Neapolitan, R. E. and Jiang, X. (2018) Artificial
A Critique of Artificial Reason. MIT Press. Intelligence: With an Introduction to Machine
Forester, T. (1985) The Information Technology Learning, 2nd edn. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Revolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Nelson, R. and Sidney, W. (1977) In search of useful
Graetz, G. and Michaels, G. (2018) Robots at work, theory of innovation, Research Policy, 6: 36–76.
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100: Nilsson, N. J. (2009) The Quest for Artificial
753–768. Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements.
Groover, M. P., Weiss, M., Nagel, R. N. and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Odrey, N. G. (1986) Industrial Robotics: Technology, Olmstead, A. and Rhode P. (2001) Reshaping the
Programming, and Applications. McGraw-Hill. landscape: the impact and diffusion of the tractor
Harari, Y. N. (2018) 21 Lessons for the 21st Century. in American agriculture, 1910–1960, The Journal
Spiegel & Grau. of Economic History, 61: 663–698.
Honey, P. and Mumford, A. (1986) The Manual of Ong, S. K. and Nee A. Y. C. (2013) Virtual and
Learning Styles. Peter Honey Associates. Augmented Reality Applications in Manufacturing.
Judis, J. B. (2016) The Populist Explosion: How New York, NY: Springer Science and Business
the Great Recession Transformed American and Media.
European Politics. New York, NY: Columbia Pasquale, F. (2015) The Black Box Society: The Secret
Global Reports. Algorithms that Control Money and Information.
Kellner, T. (2018) Game On: Augmented Reality Is Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Helping Factory Workers Become More Productive. Rasmussen, W. (1982) The mechanization of agricul-
Available at: https://www.ge.com/reports/game- ture, Scientific American, 247: 76–89.
augmented-reality-helping-factory-workers- Russell, S. J. and Norvig, P. (2009) Artificial
become-productive/ [Accessed 19 April 2018]. Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd edn.
Lanier, J. (2018) Ten Arguments for Deleting Your Prentice-Hall.
Social Media Accounts Right Now. New York, NY: Stiglitz, J. (2012) The Price of Inequality: How
Hoffmann and C. Today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future. W. by
Mantoux, P. (1927) The Industrial Revolution in the W. Norton & Company. Bibliotheque
Eighteenth Century: An Outline of the Beginnings Zeira, J. (1998) Workers, machines, and economic
of the Modern Factory System in England. London, growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113:
UK: Harcourt. 1091–1117.
Manuel, R. and Castaṅeda, A. (1974) Cultural Zuboff, S. (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism:
interuniversitaire
Democracy, Bicognitive Development, and The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier
Education. Academic Press. of Power. Public Affairs.
de
sante
user
on
03
January
2020
Page 11 of 11
